
The genomic landscapes of individual melanocytes from human skin
================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q100491078]  

# Highlights


Every cell in the human body has a unique set of somatic mutations, but it remains difficult to comprehensively genotype an individual cell. Here we describe ways to overcome this obstacle in the context of normal human skin, thus offering a glimpse into the genomic landscapes of individual melanocytes from human skin.


Alternatively, a cell can be clonally expanded in tissueculture, before sequencing, to increase the amount of genomic starting material10–13r; however, only limited types of primary human cells can expand sufficiently in tissue culture, reducing the scope of this strategy. Here, we combine elements of each strategy to genotype melanocytes from normal skin at single-cell resolution.


Fig.1 b, Expression profiles classify the cells that we genotyped into their respective lineages. Each cell is depicted in a t-distributed stochastic neighbour (t-SNE) plot and coloured according to morphology

--> Nice pairing of expression and morphology.

All donors had light skin tone and European ancestry (Extended Data Fig. 1a), and they ranged from 63 to 85 years in age

--> Bias
Unexpectedly, among sun-exposed melanocytes in this dataset,
cells from the back and limbs had more mutations than cells from the face (Fig. 2a, b, Extended Data Fig. 4). Typically, skin from the back and limbs is exposed only intermittently to sunlight and would be expected to accumulate lower levels of cumulative sun exposure than skin from the face, neck and bald scalp.

--> Hypothesis test, but this was "unexpected." It looks solid, but nevertheless seems quite ad hoc. 

Finally, our genomic studies are a resource for improving understanding of basic melanocyte biology. For example, we found that melanocytes from sun-damaged skin vary in their mutation burdens by multiple orders of magnitude. Of note, a similar pattern of variable mutation burdens was recently reported in bronchial epithelial cells from former smokers13. Melanocytes with few mutations are likely to
be more efficient at DNA repair and/or to have occupied privileged niches, protected from the sun (such as in the hair follicle). Melano- cyte stem cells in the hair follicle can contribute to the intraepidermal pool of melanocytes, as is evident in patients who have repigmenting areas42—a similar process may be operative in the general populationto replenish sun-damaged melanocytes.

--> Several assertions about melanocytes. I wonder if all of them are about human melanocytes.

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q100491078)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q100491078)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q100491078/P921%3BP4510)  
