
Innovations present in the primate interneuron repertoire
=========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q100395427]  

# Highlights

. Homologous interneuron types—which were readily identified by their RNA-expression patterns—varied in abundance and RNA expression among ferrets, mice and primates, but varied less among primates. Only a modest fraction of the genes identified as ‘markers’ of specific interneuron subtypes in any one species had this property in another species.

--> Homology can only be inferred


We found that an interneuron type that was previously associated with the mouse hippocampus—the ‘ivy cell’, which has neurogliaform characteristics—has become abundant across the neocortex of humans, macaques and marmosets but not mice or ferrets

--> Archetypes!

We also found a notable subcortical innovation: an abundant striatal interneuron type in primates that had no molecularly homologous counterpart in mice or ferrets.

--> Molecularly homologous doesn't seem very accurate. Things can only be evolutionarily homologous.

Examples of modifications to specific cell types within larger conserved brain systems include hindbrain circuits that control species-specific courtship calls in frogs7, the evolution of trichromatic vision in primates8, and neurons that have converted from motor to sensory processing to produce a new swimming behaviour in sand crabs4
.
. We identi- fied interneurons using canonical, conserved markers (for example, GAD1 and GAD2, which encode the glutamate decarboxylases required for the synthesis of GABA)

--> These genes ___cannot currently be tagged/annotated___! They are polyspecific genes. 

Across ferrets, mice and primates, the same four genes (SST, PVALB,
VIP and LAMP5) were expressed in non-overlapping subsets of neocorti- cal interneurons and together accounted for almost 100% of neocortical interneurons

--> Again, clear multispecies "genes" Maybe we need a conceptualization of multi-specific genes, with taxonomic scopes just like cell types.

Homologous cell types can acquire species-specific functions through changes in gene expression9,15,17

We observed numerous genes with cat- egorical changes in cell-type-specific expression patterns (including NTNG1, IQGAP2 and TRPC3) and, in rare cases, genes that were a specific marker in one cell class in some species but not detected at all in the interneurons of the other species11
(Fig. 1e and Extended Data Fig. 2a).
Such expression variation across species creates challenges in choosing selective markers to characterize conserved cell types: only a modest subset of the genes selected for cell-type-specific expression within one species may have this property in another species (Extended Data Fig. 3a), particularly across the evolutionary distances that separate mice (or ferrets) from primate\

each of 17 readily resolvable interneuron types was present in all cortical regions surveyed, confirming that—as described for mice15,18
—different cortical
regions contain the same basic interneuron types (Fig. 2a).

--> Hmm, quite an essentialistic view of cell types. Interesting. 

allowed us to relate cell types in the marmoset data to homologous types that had previously been identified using SMART-seq data from the human middle temporal gyrus in a recent study11
(Extended Data Fig. 7)

--> Nice work, but the "homologous types" terminology gives me goosebumps. Human MTG dataset is on Wikidata :) 


‘Cell types’ have been defined as collections of cells that change together over the course of evolution44,45
. In this study, we find that
although most of the major molecularly defined types of cortical interneurons have clear counterparts in other species, these cell types have undergone surprising degrees of evolutionary change in their abundances, the genes that they express and the levels at which they express pan-neuronal genes. The importance of these changes for the detailed physiological and connectivity properties of interneurons will be essential to understand46
.

--> Arendt 2016 super influential, as always. 

We found that an interneuron type that is abundant in the mouse hippocampus—the ivy cell, which has properties similar to neuroglia- form cells and is defined by co-expression of Lamp5 and Lhx636

--> Explicit definition. Very nice. 

To support such work, we have developed a web-based data
resource that facilitates cross-species comparisons of interneurons (http://interneuron.mccarrolllab.org/)

--> Nice viz tool

The systematic analysis of many more species and cell types could reveal more such examples of evolutionary flexibility and innovation.


Initial analyses to identify interneurons based on marker expression were conducted on each species separately. These first-round individual-species analyses produced clustering solutions with ~8–11 clusters of major cell types (neurons, glia and vasculature), from which interneuron clusters could be identified based on canonical markers (for example, GAD1 and GAD2).

Cells identified by this procedure as doublets or outliers were removed from the digital gene expression matrix, and these filtered matrices were then used for integrated analyses across regions and/or species using Liger.

We also detected several rare and distinct categories of cortical GABAergic cells, such as MEIS2+ cells—which in mouse reside in deep-layer white matter and make long-range projections—and putative Cajal-Retzius cells, which reside in layer 1 and are scarce in the adult brain. However, in agreement with other reports11, these types were inconsistently observed across individual animals and regions, likely due to laminar location and low abundance, and were not analysed further.

Homologous genes were identified using homology tables (Ensembl BioMart). Datasets were downsampled to retain similar numbers of interneurons per species. Parameter values were explored over a range using Liger functions to suggest optimal values; the resulting clusters used the parameters described below.


# Comments

We need to make sharp concepts, and make'em talk to each other. 

Eu me senti como se lendo química antiga, com noções rudimentares, "coarse" de conceitos como "proteína" ("Eiweiss", eggwhite em alemão) que eram tratados de forma costumeira, mas com muita distancia dos conceitos elaborados que empregamos hoje. 

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q100395427)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q100395427)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q100395427/P921%3BP4510)  
