
The distinct MHC-unrestricted immunobiology of innate-like and adaptive-like human γδ T cell subsets-Nature's CAR-T cells
=========================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q100753797]  
  
Publication date : 21 of October, 2020  

# Highlights
Distinct innate-like and adaptive-like immunobiological paradigms are emerging for human γδ T cells, supported by a combination of immunophenotypic, T cell receptor (TCR) repertoire, functional, and transcriptomic data. Evidence of the γδ TCR/ligand recognition modalities that respective human subsets utilize is accumulating. 

Although γδ T cells have often been viewed or analyzed en masse as a homogenous unconventional lymphocyte compartment, and typically referred to as either "innate-like T cells" or "at the interface between innate and adaptive immunity," recent studies clearly demonstrating considerable intra-compartmental functional and phenotypic heterogeneit

Vγ9Vδ2 T cells, which are the dominant γδ T cell population in human peripheral blood, currently represent the strongest candidate for an innate-like human γδ T cell subset.

Crucially, mature effector Vγ9Vδ2 T cells universally respond in a TCR-dependent fashion to host and pathogen-derived phosphoantigens (pAgs), which include the highly potent microbially derived compound (E)-4-hydroxy-3-methyl-but-2-enyl pyrophosphate (HMBPP).

, Vγ9Vδ2 T cells have been shown to exhibit long-lived expansions in response to several pathogens.16 These observations emphasize that the immunobiology of Vγ9Vδ2 T cells is best described as "innate-like" rather than "innate" and may in reality reflect a blend of a limited number of characteristics more typically associated with adaptive immunity

Vδ2neg γδ T cells represent a minority (normally around 20%) of γδ T cells in peripheral blood, but are enriched relative to Vγ9Vδ2 T cells in solid tissues.

 However, compelling evidence now suggests that human Vδ2neg T cells, at least in peripheral blood, display an adaptive-like immunobiology.

 There is extremely high diversity within Vδ2neg TCR CDR3 sequences, in both TCRγ and TCRδ chains, owing to a high level of exonuclease activity, a large number of N/P nucleotide additions, and for the Vδ chain, multiple Dδ-segment usage.

 Recently, human Vγ9negVδ2 T cells have emerged as an additional adaptive-like subset.

While Vγ9Vδ2 T cells are the predominant γδ T cell subset in peripheral blood, in contrast Vδ2neg T cells, and especially Vδ1+ T cells, are dominant in solid tissues.40 However, our understanding of such human tissue-associated γδ T cells lags far behind that of peripheral blood populations.

One of the first tissue-associated γδ T cell subsets to be heavily studied were dendritic epidermal T cells (DETC), a murine γδ subset localized to epidermis.41 Although absent in humans, they are important to consider briefly as a prototypic tissue-associated γδ T cell subset.

D27hi Tnaive Vδ2neg cells were largely absent in the liver, with the majority of Vδ2neg cells adopting a CD45RAhi/CD27lo/neg phenotype that matches that of peripheral blood Vδ2neg Teffector cells

In addition, the CD45RAlo population of hepatic Vδ1+ T cells reported by Hunter et al,9 which may represent a new liver resident subset, also emphasizes the potential for distinct tissue-associated γδ T cell immunobiology to emerge, even in tissues with strong links to the peripheral circulation.


Human Vγ4+ and mouse Vγ7+ IELs may play a dual role in the intestine, similar to DETC in the epidermis.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q100753797)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q100753797)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q100753797&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/IMR.12928)  
