
Toward an epistemology of Wikipedia
===================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q101955295]  

# Highlights
the epistemic consequences of people using Wikipedia as a source of information are likely to be quite good.

In addition, Wikipedia has a number of other epistemic virtues (e.g., power, speed, and fecundity) that arguably outweigh any deficiency in terms of reliability. 
ven so, epistemologists and information scientists should certainly be trying to identify changes (or alternatives) to Wikipedia that will bring about even better epistemic consequences.
This article suggests that to improve Wikipedia, we need to clarify what our epistemic values are and to better understand why Wikipedia works as well as it does

Mass collaboration is one of the newest trends in the creation and dissemination of knowledge and information.

Jimmy Wales, said that “the goal of Wikipedia is fun for the contributors” (as cited in
Poe, 2006). Even if the contributors to Wikipedia ultimately just want to have fun, however, building a good encyclopedia is still an important goal of this project

Epistemology is the study of what knowledge is and how
people can acquire it (cf. Feldman, 2003). According to
Alvin Goldman (1999), a primary task for the epistemologist is to evaluate institutions, such as Wikipedia, in terms
of their epistemic consequences. That is, the epistemologist should ask whether people are more (or less) likely to
acquire knowledge as a result of a particular institution being
in existence

In fact, the creation and dissemination of knowledge in general is very often a social activity. For example, libraries, publishing companies, universities, search engine companies, and even dictionaries are typically large-scale, collective endeavors. While early lexicographers (e.g., Samuel Johnson) worked largely on their own, subsequent dictionaries always have been produced by large teams. In fact, in its early days, the Oxford English Dictionary, in a strategy very similar to Wikipedia, solicited help from the general public (cf. Winchester, 1998, pp. 101–114).

For example, exactly why is knowing something more valuable than simply having a true belief about it? This research, however, has rarely been applied to actual decisions that people make where epistemic consequences are at stake. For example, when someone purchases an encyclopedia, is he or she more concerned with how much accurate
information it contains or with how much of its information is accurate? There is some philosophical work on the “epistemic utilities” of scientists (cf. Levi, 1967; Maher, 1993), but only a few people have looked at what epistemic values are at play in more mundane contexts such as education and information management 

. We are concerned here with the normative question,
from the epistemology of testimony, of whether people ought
to grant cognitive authority to Wikipedia (cf. Fallis, 2004b,
p. 468; Goldman, 2001). In other words, instead of looking at
the conditions under which people trust information sources,
we want to know whether this particular information source
really is trustworthy

. According to Harry Frankfurt (2005, pp. 33–34), it is “this lack of connection to a concern with truth—this indifference to how things really are—that I regard as of the essence of bullshit.” Thus, there may be some amount of “bullshit” on Wikipedia.7


People will not always double-check information even when the stakes are reasonably high. In other words, people are subject to the so-called Principle of Least Effort. Empirical studies have found that “most researchers (even ‘serious’ scholars) will tend to choose easily available information sources, even when they are objectively of low quality”

. More generally, we trust group testimony if we know that the process by which
the testimony is produced is reliable (cf. Tolefsen, 2007, pp. 306–308). The process by which entries in Wikipedia are produced seems to be fairly reliable.

As a result, there is reason to think that people are more likely to overestimate the reliability of traditional encyclopedias than the reliability of Wikipedia.
As Eli Guinnee (2007) stated, “an inaccuracy in Britannica is (mis)taken as fact, an inaccuracy in Wikipedia is taken with a grain of salt, easily confirmed or proved wrong.”

For example, in addition to general disclaimers, Warnings are placed at the
top of Wikipedia entries whose accuracy or neutrality has been disputed. Unlike traditional encyclopedias, Wikipedia is not a “black box.” Readers of Wikipedia have easy access to the entire editing history of every entry. 

For example, one can look to see if there were any dissenting opinions, what these different viewpoints were, and what arguments ultimately carried the day. This is in line with John Stuart Mill’s (1859/1978) claim that exposure to different viewpoints is the best way to learn the truth about a topic (cf. Goldman, 1999, pp. 212–213).

For example, in addition to reliability, Goldman (1999, pp. 87–94) discussed the epistemic
values of power, speed, and fecundity (cf. Thagard, 1997).
That is, we also are concerned with how much knowledge can be acquired from an information source, how fast that knowledge can be acquired, and how many people can acquire that knowledge. Fecundity, in particular, is an especially important concept at the intersection of social epistemology and work on epistemic values.

In addition to being freely accessible, Wikipedia is essentially an “open-source” project. That is, anyone is allowed to make copies of its content for free (and many Web sites do). While this increases the dissemination of knowledge, contributors do have to give up any intellectual property rights that they might have claimed in their work

the true miracle of Wikipedia is that this open system of amateur user contributions and edits doesn’t simply collapse into anarchy”

 The same sort of explanation is often given for the success of open-source software projects (cf. Duguid, 2006). In that instance, the slogan is “given enough eyeballs,
all bugs are shallow.”

Errors on the Internet can be corrected much more easily
and quickly than can errors in a printed book

New policies (e.g., contributors are no longer allowed to claim credentials unless they
can prove that they actually have them) have been designed to do the same (cf. Read, 2007b). Such developments fall under the so-called ameliorative project in epistemology, which focuses on how we can modify our institutions and practices to better achieve our epistemic goals (cf. Kitcher, 1992, p. 64)

For example, Larry Sanger is working to create a more reliable alternative to Wikipedia (see http://en.citizendium.org/
wiki/CZ:About). Citizendium.org welcomes experts to contribute as authors and as editors, and entries that meet certain
standards of quality are officially “approved” by such qualified editors

--> Lol, it kind of resurfaced this very week and will have a edit-a-thon tomorrow


# Comments

Wikidata migh share much of these epistemic virtues, if not in comparison to Encyclopedias, in comparison to ontologies and privately curated resources.

Super cool article.
## Tags
1.2.4
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q101955295)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q101955295)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q101955295/P921%3BP4510)  
