
ScispaCy: Fast and Robust Models for Biomedical Natural Language Processing
===========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q101248419]  

# Highlights
This paper describes scis- paCy, a new Python library and models for practical biomedical/scientific text processing, which heavily leverages the spaCy library.

Release and evaluate two fast and convenient pipelines for biomedical text, which include tokenization, part of speech tagging, depen- dency parsing and named entity recognition.

we retrain spaCy3 models for POS tagging, depen- dency parsing, and NER using datasets relevant to biomedical text, and enhance the tokenization module with additional rules

In this data re- lease, we also align the converted dependency parses to their original text spans in the raw, un- tokenized abstracts from the original release,6 and include the PubMed metadata for the abstracts which was discarded in the GENIA corpus re- leased by McClosky and Charniak (2008). We hope that this raw format can emerge as a resource for practical evaluation in the biomedical domain of core NLP tasks such as tokenization, sentence segmentation and joint models of syntax.

The NER model in spaCy is a transition-based system based on the chunking model from Lam- ple et al. (2016).

The main NER model in both released packages in scispaCy is trained on the mention spans in the MedMentions dataset (Murty et al., 2018).

To generate candidate entities for linking a given mention, we use an approximate nearest neigh- bours search over our subset of UMLS concepts and concept aliases and output the entities asso- ciated with the nearest K.

the max number of candidates for a single mention being 164.

During development of the can- didate generator, we noticed that abbreviated men- tions account for a substantial proportion of the failure cases where none of the generated candi- dates match the correct entity. To partially rem- edy this, we implement the unsupervised abbrevi- ation detection algorithm of Schwartz and Hearst (2002), substituting mention candidates marked as abbreviations for their long form definitions before searching for their nearest neighbours.

abbreviated names and noun compounds containing punctuation are more common, whilst the wide range of citation styles can easily be misidentified as sentence boundaries

7 Related Work

Apache cTakes (Savova et al., 2010) was de- signed specifically for clinical notes rather than the broader biomedical domain. MetaMap and MetaMapLite (Aronson, 2001; Demner-Fushman et al., 2017) from the National Library of Medicine focus specifically on entity linking using the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS)

The GENIA Tagger (Tsuruoka et al., 2005) provides the closest comparison to scispaCy due to it’s multi-stage pipeline,

In this paper we presented several robust model pipelines for a variety of natural language process- ing tasks focused on biomedical text. 

Future work on scispaCy will include a more fully featured entity linker built from the current candidate generation work, as well as other pipeline components such as negation detection commonly used in the clinical and biomedical natural language processing communities.

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q101248419)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q101248419)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q101248419/P921%3BP4510)  
