
Decoding myofibroblast origins in human kidney fibrosis
=======================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q101569793]  
  
Publication date : 11 of November, 2020  

# Highlights

 Here, using single-cell RNA sequencing, we profled the transcriptomes
of cells from the proximal and non-proximal tubules of healthy and fbrotic human
kidneys to map the entire human kidney. This analysis enabled us to map all
matrix-producing cells at high resolution, and to identify distinct subpopulations of
pericytes and fbroblasts as the main cellular sources of scar-forming myofbroblasts
during human kidney fbrosis. 

Using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), we
profiled approximately 135,000 human and mouse kidney cells during
homeostasis and fibrosis.


More than 80% of renal cortical cells are proximal tubular epithelial cells and have thus
dominated previous single-cell maps, masking other populations5
.
We therefore sorted for viable, non-proximal tubular cells (CD10−)
and CD10+ proximal tubular cells to map the entire kidney (Extended
Data Fig. 1a, b). Although CD10 is also expressed by other cell types, this
strategy allows an enrichment or depletion of proximal tubular cells. 

Fig. 1 | Single-cell atlas of human CKD.a, Scheme of the kidney. CT, connecting
tubule; DC, dendritic cell; DCT, distal convoluted tubule; DTL, descending thin
limb; GC, glomerular capillary; IC, intercalated cell; Mdc, macula densa; Mast, mast
cell; Mesa, mesangial cells; MC, macrophage; MF, myofibroblast; PC, peritubular
capillary; Pe, pericyte; Pec, parietal epithelial cells; Pod, podocyte; PT, proximal
tubule; Sch, Schwann cell; TAL, thick ascending limb; VR, vasa recta; vSMC,
vascular smooth muscle cell.

--> Nice model. The terms are generic, but from the context, ought to infer the model is human-centered.

c, Scaled gene expression of the top 10 specific genes in each cluster (see
Supplementary Data 2 for detailed information). Each column is the average
expression of all cells in a cluster


To identify the cell types that contribute to the production of ECM in
kidney fibrosis, we established a single-cell ECM expression score that
included collagens, glycoproteins and proteoglycans7
, and confirmed an increased score in published CKD data

--> I like this kind of stuff. 

hus, the vast majority of ECM in human kidney fibrosis originates from mesenchymal cells, with a minor contribution from
de-differentiated proximal tubule cells.

Pseudotime trajectory and diffusion map analysis of major
ECM-expressing cells from the PDGFRβ+
 populations indicated three main sources of myofibroblasts in human kidneys: (1) NOTCH3+
RGS5+PDGFRα− pericytes; (2) MEG3+PDGFRα+ fibroblasts; and
(3) COLEC11+CXCL12+ fibroblasts (Fig. 2c, Extended Data Fig. 5a). 


PDGFRα+ PDGFRβ+  marks ECM-expressing cells

--> marks _some_ ECM-expressing cells!

Similar to the human kidney, the main ECM-expressing cell population exhibited expression of Pdgfra, Pdgfrb and Postn 

Combined, our data demonstrate that PDGFRα+
PDGFRβ+
dual-positive mesenchymal cells, including all fibroblast and myofibroblast populations but not non-activated PDGFRα−
PDGFRβ+
 pericytes
(low ECM-expressing pericytes), represent most ECM-expressing cells.



Distinct fibroblast and myofibroblast cell states
We next sought to determine whether the above fibroblast and
myofibroblast cell states represent distinct cell types with distinct
gene regulatory profiles1

--> grr, without defintions for types and states, this is largely meaning less.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q101569793)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q101569793)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q101569793/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Decoding%20myofibroblast%20origins%20in%20human%20kidney%20fibrosis'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
