
Focused Query Expansion with Entity Cores for Patient-Centric Health Search
===========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q101086678]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2020  

# Highlights

 Expressivequerying for patient-centric needs is poorly supported by search engines.This paper overcomes this issue by enriching user queries with judiciouslychosen entities and classes from a large knowledge graph


dvances  on  health  search  and  QA  [24]  have  mostly  focused  on  specifickinds of information needs and content sources: short consumer queries thatcan tap health portals on topics such as “Alzheimer’s treatments” or “Ariceptside effects” (e.g., [18,46]), expert queries on scientific articles (e.g., [36,41]) suchas “pancreatic cancer risk with DPP4 inhibitors”, and specialized retrieval overelectronic patient records or clinical notes (e.g., [7,25,44]). In contrast,patient-centricneeds focusing on queries about individual health situations posed bypatients themselves of general physicians on their behalf, have received little-to-no attention.

--> Wow, very important point

The  design  choice  put  forward  in  this  paper  is  a  combination  of  the  IRand Semantic-Web paradigms. We build on query expansion, and use extractednamed entities and a knowledge graph to generate expanded queries.


Query Expansion.Query  expansion  is  a  classical  IR  topic  (see,  e.g.,  [6]).As  sources  for  expansion  terms,  most  works  considered  either  initial  searchresults assuming pseudo relevance feedback or background corpora for comput-ing semantic relatedness measures between terms (see, e.g., [15,16])

Knowledge graphs (KGs) have been leveraged as a source of relevant entitiesand types for query expansion or query translation. A major focus here is onbridging the gap  between  user vocabulary,  such as “high  blood sugar”,  andbiomedical terminology, such as “hyperglycemia” [24,35].

uery Processing.Given a patient-centric information in the form of initialforum posts, ECO starts with the few keywords stated in the post title and enriches it in two stages, by leveraging the knowledge graph as follows
:•Expansion:Information  extraction  is  performed  on  the  provided  casedescriptions, i.e. the body of health forum post, to identify entities in theKG that are specific for the medical situation of the patient. These entitiesare added to the query.
•Focusing:The expanded query is often too broad, with the risk of driftingaway from the user’s intent andneeds. Therefore, we refocus the query bycomputing a coherent core of most relevant entities. This way, the expandedquery is reduced into a more concise form, to ensure that query answers arefocused on the user’s individual needs

--> Cool tactic

A Query Graph, denoted byQG=(V, E), is a directed graphwith labeled verticesVand labeled edgesE.Vconsists of the entities that appearin a patient’s question’s title and the full text of the corresponding post.Econsistsof the relational statements that exist between entities ofVin the underlyingknowledge graph.

Our goal is to extract themost  informativeandfocusedsub-graph from theQG
This resembles the task of graph summarization, where summaries takethe form of dense subgraphs, aiming to represent the gist of the query.

Not surprisingly, computing EC’s is NP-hard,but greedy methods are good approximations in many settings

Our experi-mental data consists of 97,390 clinical trials fromclinicaltrials.gov. We evaluateECO on the 15 randomly selected queries.The crowdsourcing results in Table5demonstrate that ECO is able to achievelarge performance gains across all metrics compared to the previously best base-line. The inter-annotator agreement between crowd workers is 0.49, far fromperfect but remarkably high.

Since clinical trials are difficult to interpret for lay users, we also evaluatethe results with judgements by medical professionals.

These are subject to individual preferences, so thatranking answers by personal relevance is important. We would use travel-centricKGs, and use ECO for focused query expansion. This is left for future work.



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q101086678)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q101086678)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q101086678/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q101086678&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-62419-4_31)  
