
snRNA-seq reveals a subpopulation of adipocytes that regulates thermogenesis
============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q101051363]  

# Highlights

Here we
use single-nucleus RNA-sequencing (snRNA-seq) analysis in mice and humans to characterize adipocyte heterogeneity. We identify a rare subpopulation of adipocytes in mice that increases in abundance at higher temperatures, and we show that this subpopulation regulates the activity of neighbouring adipocytes through acetate-mediated modulation of their thermogenic capacity


It comprises approximately 20–30% mature adipocytes5,6
, as well as the stromal vascular fraction
(SVF), which includes different cell types7
. Adipocytes in turn are cat-
egorized into three different cell types: white adipocytes store energy, whereas brown adipocytes, and a related, less thermogenically effi- cient population referred to as beige or brite adipocytes, dissipate energy through non-shivering thermogenesis.

In rodents, classical
brown adipocytes are located within distinct areas, whereas beige or brite cells arise in response to cold stimulation within various WAT depots7

. In rodents, classical
brown adipocytes are located within distinct areas, whereas beige or brite cells arise in response to cold stimulation within various WAT depots7

--> Promoter-defined cell type

Canonical adipocyte markers and brown adipocyte markers15
were expressed in all groups
(Extended Data Fig. 1c), albeit at varying levels. Preadipocyte markers (Ly6a and Cd34; Extended Data Fig. 1c) were found in cluster C2, indicat- ing that these could be differentiating precursor cells16


Trajec- tory analysis identified three main states of cells that correspond to the three temperature conditions, whereas P4 cells were in the early stage of each progression (Extended Data Fig. 2c).

). Quantification revealed that approxi- mately 10% of all adipocytes within iBAT and 20% within subscWAT expressed CYP2E1 (Extended Data Fig. 4b). An analysis comparing the expression of P4 marker genes (Aldh1a1, Nrip1, Auts2, Atp2b4, Cyp2e1 and so on) with bulk RNA expression data from iBAT, subscWAT and inguinal WAT (ingWAT) did not reveal any overlap with any of the three depots, indicating that these P4 cells cannot be classified according to existing categories (Extended Data Fig. 4c–e). In accordance with our single-nucleus data, we observed that the number of CYP2E1+
cells
decreased after cold exposure and increased under thermoneutral conditions

In human adipose tissue from the deep-neck region, both multi- locular and unilocular cells stained positive for CYP2E1, suggesting that these cells constitute a subpopulation that can acquire different morphologies (Extended Data Fig. 4n–p).

CYP2E1+ adipocytes control thermogenesis

--> Gene-based alias

To study the thermogenic capacity of P4 cells in more detail, we dif- ferentiated the SVF from iBAT and ingWAT in a dish and—in accordance with the in vivo data—observed a heterogeneous mixture of differenti- ated adipocytes, with approximately 17% of iBAT-derived and 23% of ingWAT-derived adipocytes expressing both ALDH1A1 and CYP2E1 (Fig. 4a, Extended Data Fig. 8a, b)

--> Expression-based characterization

In conclusion, we provide here an in-depth single-cell analysis of
mature brown and white adipocytes in both mice and humans. The CYP2E1+
ALDH1A1+ population of cells that we have identified controls
the thermogenic function of other adipocytes in a paracrine manner by modulating the levels of the short-chain fatty acid acetate. This mechanism is likely to have evolved to preserve energy under thermon- eutral conditions, and might be leveraged to modulate the thermogenic capacity of adipose tissue.

--> Interesting that they call it a "population" and not a cell type. The combination with present tense ("controls") illustrates that the intended meaning is not descriptive, but generalizative.

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q101051363)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q101051363)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q101051363/P921%3BP4510)  
