
Biocuration - mapping resources and needs
=========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q101217428]  

# Highlights
Biocuration involves a variety of teams and individuals across the globe. However, they may not self-identify as biocurators, as they may be unaware of biocuration as a career path or because biocuration is only part of their role. The lack of a clear, up-to-date profile of biocuration creates challenges for organisations like ELIXIR, the ISB and GOBLET to systematically support biocurators and for biocurators themselves to develop their own careers.

The art and science of biocuration helps make data Find- able, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable (FAIR)5
; it places data into context, makes it more interoperable, adding unique identifiers, licences, and structured descriptions alongside other appropriate metadata.

We urge the community to ensure that the knowledge and skills offered by existing biocurators are shared across ELIXIR Nodes and beyond, and to develop training so it is available to those areas and disciplines where biocurators needs are in highest demand.

Both the pilot and global survey were conducted online using SurveyMonkey (https://www.surveymonkey.co.uk).

Respondents work in 91 different organisations, with 84% of respondents belonging to academic institutions. 

From a list of biocuration activities, the tasks most often selected in the survey were data annotation (69 of 166 respondents - 42%), ontology and controlled vocabulary appli- cation (62 of 166 respondents - 37%), data analysis (48 of 166 respondents - 29%), and literature curation (47 of 166 respond- ents - 28%) (see

Participant responses to the survey, our conversations with biocurators and the workshops also make it clear that the precise nature of biocuration methods employed depends on the area in which they work. This is reflected in the 400 different tools listed in the survey (see Underlying data: Tools and resources8
)
as being used in biocuration activities.

According to the survey, 46 of 164 (28%) respondents said that they have received training in biocuration, while the rest said that they have not received any training

All four EMBL-EBI biocurators that we spoke to as well as some workshop participants commented that they had not previ- ously heard of the role before becoming a biocurator. Some also felt that biocuration is underappreciated, which is reflected in difficulties obtaining funding for biocuration work.

Modern science, whatever the discipline, is turning into some- thing of a data science. This seems particularly true of the life sciences, where the explosion in omics data, followed by an increase in publications and linked datasets, has led to a massive overall increase in freely available structured and unstructured biological data

The day-to-day activities of biocurators are amazingly diverse and include both biocuration and non-biocuration tasks such as training, outreach, website design and project management. As noted by Samili and Vita13, this highlights that biocurators possess many transferable skills in addition to their scientific and biocuration expertise, characteristics that are highly valued by employers. Our survey shows that biocurators in different resources work quite differently, using different tools and follow- ing different workflows and pipelines.

The specific nature of biocuration tasks observed in our survey calls for a shift in the way that we teach biocuration skills. There is a need to develop bioinformatics training that is targeted to biocurators (e.g. pro- gramming skills for biocuration related tasks vs program- ming for research related tasks). Ensuring that all biocurators are up to speed with the latest biocuration and data steward- ship best practices should increase the standard and consistency of biocuration while providing transferable skills that improve career mobility.

It can take many years of training
and experience to become a biocurator, yet currently, sala- ries and more importantly job security, often do not reflect this investment. 

We hope the work we have presented here continues this educative process as we continue to define the profession of biocuration.

# Comments

Rich for Wikipedia page.


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q101217428)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q101217428)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q101217428/P921%3BP4510)  
