
Identification of SARS-CoV-2 Inhibitors using Lung and Colonic Organoids
========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q101051356]  
  
Publication date : 28 of October, 2020  

# Highlights

we developed a lung organoid model using human pluripotent stem cells (hPSC-LOs).
The hPSC-LOs (particularly alveolar type-II-like cells) are permissive to SARS-CoV-2
infection, and showed robust induction of chemokines following SARS-CoV-2
infection, similar to what is seen in patients with COVID-19.

We therefore also generated complementary hPSC-derived colonic
organoids (hPSC-COs) to explore the response of colonic cells to SARS-CoV-2 infection. 

 Quantitative PCR with reverse transcription (qRT–PCR)
and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) profiling validated the expression
of alveolar type II (AT2) cell markers in the hPSC-LOs (Extended Data
Fig. 1d, e).

e, Heatmap from RNA-seq data of AT2 cell markers in hPSC-derived LOs, COs, pancreatic endocrine cells, and liver organoids

--> List of markers in supplementary, added to Wikidata.

.  Correlation analysis of signature genes
further validated the AT2-like cell population in hPSC-LOs showing
high similarity to adult human lung AT

--> AT2-like, not AT2. Interesting choice. 

 Immunostaining analysis further validated
that ACE2 is expressed in pro-SP-B+
SP-B+
pro-SP-C+
SP-C+
AT2-like cells

We next derived hPSC-COs from HUES8 cells using previously
established strategies19,20 (Extended Data Fig. 3b–e). Using single-cell
RNA-seq (scRNA-seq), five cell clusters were identified including
KRT20+
 enterocytes, MUC2+
 goblet cells, EPHB2+
 transit-amplifying
cells, CHGA+
 enteroendocrine cells, and LGR5+
 or BMI1+
 stem cells,
and most cells expressed CDX2 and VIL1 (Fig. 2d and Extended Data
Fig. 4a–c). ACE2, TMPRSS2 (ref. 14) and FURIN were also expressed in all
five cell clusters, but highly enriched and correlated in KRT20+
 enterocytes (Fig. 2e–g). ACE2 expression in KRT20+
 enterocytes was further
validated by immunostaining (Fig. 2h).

--> enterocyte, not enterocyte-like. Also interesting.  Why did they do that?


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q101051356)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q101051356)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q101051356/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Identification%20of%20SARS-CoV-2%20Inhibitors%20using%20Lung%20and%20Colonic%20Organoids'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
