
Identification of an inhibitory neuron subtype, the L-stellate cell of the cochlear nucleus
===========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q101212121]  
  
Publication date : 03 of November, 2020  

# Highlights
Auditory processing depends upon inhibitory signaling by interneurons, even at its earliest stages in the ventral cochlear nucleus (VCN). Remarkably, to date only a single subtype of inhibitory neuron has been documented in the VCN, a projection neuron termed the D-stellate cell. With the use of a transgenic mouse line, optical clearing, and imaging techniques, combined with electrophysiological tools, we revealed a population of glycinergic cells in the VCN distinct from the D-stellate cell. 

Given their abundance, combined with their narrow dendritic fields and axonal projections, it is likely that these neurons, here termed L-stellate cells, play a significant role in frequency-specific processing of acoustic signals.


Within the VCN, only a single glycinergic inhibitory cell type, called the D-stellate or radiate multipolar cell, has been described.

 Furthermore, previous histological studies also reported the presence of small inhibitory neurons (glycinergic or possibly GABAergic) that are different from the D-stellate cells, but the identity of such neurons is unknown.


 Here we comprehensively examined the diversity of inhibitory neurons in the VCN using a well-characterized transgenic mouse line, GlyT2-GFP, (Zeilhofer et al., 2005; Kuo et al., 2012; Moore and Trussell, 2017) which labels virtually all glycinergic neurons in the CN.

 The neuronal glycine transporter, GlyT2, is a reliable marker of glycinergic cells

 --> marker

 . In order to test whether the small GFP-positive cells also project to contralateral CN, we injected retrogradely-transported fluorescent latex beads (50–100 nL) unilaterally into CN of GlyT2-GFP mice

 --> cool

Subtypes of VCN stellate cells have been named according to the projections of their axons (D- for Dorsal, T-for Trapezoid bundle)

Subtypes of VCN stellate cells have been named according to the projections of their axons (D- for Dorsal, T-for Trapezoid bundle). Given their Local projections, we term the small, multipolar glycinergic cells ‘L-stellate cells’.

--> Cool! 2.4.2.3. Nomenclature

Indeed, many L-stellate cells were located near the margins of VCN, near granule cell regions. These could be the small multipolar marginal cells described by Doucet and Ryugo, 2006

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q101212121)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q101212121)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q101212121/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q101212121&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q101212121/P921%3BP4510)  
