
Pathway information extracted from 25 years of pathway figures
==============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q101473819]  

# Highlights

the scientific literature, pathway figures are the pinnacle of com- munication for published work, synthesizing diverse sources and types of data spanning decades into a coherent model.

pathway models can be used in enrichment analyses [1], enhanced data visualization [2, 3], knowledge graphs [4, 5], biomedical inference [6], and database queries [7, 8]

A broader, community-curated approach was undertaken by WikiPathways to allow any researcher to model and freely share their pathway knowledge [15–17].

Kozhenkov S, Baitaluk M. Mining and integration of pathway diagrams from imaging data. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England). 2012;28(5):739–42. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts018.
22. Rodriguez-Esteban R, Iossifov I. Figure mining for biomedical research. Bioinformatics. 2009;25(16):2082–4. https:// doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp318.

In this study, we have identified pathway figures published over the past 25 years and characterized their content in terms of recognized gene symbols by optical character recognition (OCR).

The goal of this work was to identify the human gene content in a comprehensive collec-
tion of published pathway figures, to characterize its biological relevance, and to increase meaningful, FAIR [25] access to this pathway knowledge resource

Starting with 235,081 figures from a PMC image query that. Two rounds ofmachine learning effectively concentrated actual pathway figures.

The papers containing pathway figures can be characterized by paper-level annota  tions, for example disease ontology terms from Europe PMC and genes recognized in the text by PubTator

There is a wealth of information visually conveyed by pathway figures, including localization, reactions, cas- cades, cycles, co-factors, metabolites, drugs, and other biological concepts. The most tractable and widely used content—even from fully-annotated pathway models—is the gene content.

On average, there were 18.9 genes recognized per figure, compared to only 3.4 genes recognized in the text of the same papers by PubTator.

Over a quarter of the unique genes recognized in pathway figures (3710 or 28%) were not present in either WikiPathways nor Reactome collections (as of January 2020).

Europe PMC goes further by supporting community-contributed mappings between genes and papers (https://europepmc.org/annotations). While these typically derive from text-based processing, the same deposition and integration system could be used to accept gene-paper mappings based on figures.

We produced an online tool using R Shiny (https://gladstone-bioinformatics.shinyapps. io/shiny-25years) to enable filtering, searching, and viewing the full collection of 65k pathway figures by enriched disease terms, genes, date, and various publication metadata fields (Fig. 2). This tool has already proven useful in building SARS-CoV-2 pathways at WikiPathways (http://covid.wikipathways.org)aspart of the COVID-19 Disease Map initiative (https://covid.pages.uni.lu/map_curation).

The BioThings Explorer platform includes a collection of APIs semantically defining inputs and outputs that comprise a knowl- edge graph (https://biothings-explorer.readthedocs.io)[5].

In our 65k pathway figure collection, the first published figures representing the Hippo
signaling pathway appeared in 2007 [38, 39], more than a decade after the initial discovery of the central Wts gene, and after the core components were described in the literature (Fig. 3).

Despite unlocking the basic contents of published pathway figures, this work only partially mitigates gross deficiencies in current pathway knowledge representation and communication. Oh, the figures we have seen! Having scannedmany thousands ofpathway figures as a collection, the most obvious point to make is that standardization is desper- ately needed. Standards for pathway models have been around for decades [50–52]and have been implemented in a variety of freely available software tools


classification of figures To properly identify pathway figures among the PMC image query results, two rounds of machine learning were performed using Google Cloud AutoML Vision. The AutoML service was accessed and controlled via a REST API and a web-based dashboard
# Comments
