
OWL 2 Web Ontology Language Primer (Second Edition)
===================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q102929379]  

# Highlights

OWL documents, known as ontologies, can be published in the World Wide Web and may refer to or be referred from other OWL ontologies. OWL is part of the W3C's Semantic Web technology stack, which includes RDF [RDF Concepts] and SPARQL [SPARQL].

This document is intended to provide an initial understanding about OWL 2. In particular it is supposed to be accessible for people yet unfamiliar with the topic.

he RDF/XML syntax for OWL is just RDF/XML, with a particular translation for the OWL constructs [OWL 2 RDF Mapping]. This is the only syntax that is mandatory to be supported by all OWL 2 tools

An ontology is a set of precise descriptive statements about some part of the world (usually referred to as the domain of interest or the subject matter of the ontology). Precise descriptions satisfy several purposes: most notably, they prevent misunderstandings in human communication and they ensure that software behaves in a uniform, predictable way and works well with other software.

OWL 2 is not a programming language: OWL 2 is declarative, i.e. it describes a state of affairs in a logical way. Appropriate tools (so-called reasoners) can then be used to infer further information about that state of affairs. The correct answer to any such question is predetermined by the formal semantics (which comes in two versions: the Direct Semantics [OWL 2 Direct Semantics] and the RDF-Based Semantics [OWL 2 RDF-Based Semantics])

 there is no way to enforce that a certain piece of information (like the social security number of a person) has to be syntactically present

The basic notions are:

- Axioms: the basic statements that an OWL ontology expresses
- Entities: elements used to refer to real-world objects
- Expressions: combinations of entities to form complex descriptions from basic ones

The results of the modeling processes are called ontologies – a terminology that also helps to avoid confusion since the term “model” is often used in a rather different sense in knowledge representation

Statements that are made in an ontology are called axioms in OWL 2, and the ontology asserts that its axioms are true

The way ontological axioms interact can be very subtle and difficult for people to understand. This is both a strength and a weakness of OWL 2. It is a strength because OWL 2 tools can discover information that a person would not have spotted. This allows knowledge engineers to model more directly and the system to provide useful feedback and critique of the modeling. It is a weakness because it is comparatively difficult for humans to immediately foresee the actual effect of various constructs in various combinations.

All atomic constituents of statements, be they objects (John, Mary), categories (female) or relations (married) are called entities. In OWL 2, we denote objects as individuals, categories as classes and relations as properties.

Stating that Person and Human are equivalent amounts exactly to the same as stating that both Person is a subclass of Human and Human is a subclass of Person.

In practice, disjointness statements are often forgotten or neglected. The arguable reason for this could be that intuitively, classes are considered disjoint unless there is other evidence. By omitting disjointness statements, many potentially useful consequences can get lost.

OWL does not make the assumption that different names are names for different individuals. (This lack of a required “unique names assumption” is particularly well-suited to Semantic Web applications where names may be coined by different organizations at different times unknowingly referring to the same individual.) Hence, if we want to exclude the option of John and Bill being the same individual, this has to be explicitly specified as follows:

 :John owl:differentFrom :Bill .

 we can state that Jack's age is not 53.

  []  rdf:type               owl:NegativePropertyAssertion ;
     owl:sourceIndividual   :Jack ;
     owl:assertionProperty  :hasAge ;
     owl:targetValue        53 .

This is a commonly modeling error: note that a domain (or range) statement is not a constraint on the knowledge, but allows a reasoner to infer further knowledge. If we state – as in our example – that an age is only given for persons, then everything we give an age for automatically becomes a person.

The intersection of two classes consists of exactly those individuals which are instances of both classes.
The union of two classes contains every individual which is contained in at least one of these classes.

The complement of a class corresponds to logical negation: it consists of exactly those objects which are not members of the class itself. The following definition of childless persons uses the class complement and also demonstrates that class constructors can be nested. (owl:complementOf).

Property restrictions provide another type of logic-based constructors for complex classes. As the name suggests, property restrictions use constructors involving properties. This means that there is an expectation that for every instance of Parent, there exists at least one child, and that child is a member of the class Person

As a rule of thumb, when translating a natural language statement into a logical axiom, existential quantification occurs far more frequently. Natural language indicators for the usage of universal quantification are words like “only,” “exclusively,” or “nothing but.”

If we happen to know the exact number of John's children who are parents, this can be specified as follows:

Functional-Style Syntax
 ClassAssertion( 
   ObjectExactCardinality( 3 :hasChild :Parent ) 
   :John
 )
 (owl:qualifiedCardinality)

 n a cardinality restriction, providing the class is optional; if we just want to talk about the number of all of John's children we can write the following:

Functional-Style Syntax
 ClassAssertion(
   ObjectExactCardinality( 5 :hasChild ) 
   :John
 ) 
(owl:cardinality) 


A very straightforward way to describe a class is just to enumerate all its instances.
 :MyBirthdayGuests  owl:equivalentClass  [
   rdf:type   owl:Class ;
   owl:oneOf  ( :Bill  :John  :Mary )
 ] .

it also stipulates that Bill, John, and Mary are the only members of MyBirthdayGuests. Therefore, classes defined this way are sometimes referred to as closed classes or enumerated sets

Bill, John, and Mary are the only members of MyBirthdayGuests. Therefore, classes defined this way are sometimes referred to as closed classes or enumerated sets. If we now assert Jeff as an instance of MyBirthdayGuests, the consequence is that Jeff must be equal to one of the above three persons.

Note that being asymmetric is a much stronger notion than being non-symmetric. Likewise, being symmetric is a much stronger notion than being non-asymmetric.

It also make sense to transfer the notion of class disjointness to properties.

Properties can furthermore be irreflexive, meaning that no individual can be related to itself by such a role.

, every individual can be linked by the hasHusband property to at most one other individual. This kind of properties are called functional

 we do not want hasParent to be a special case of hasGrandparent nor do we want hasGrandparent to refer to great-grandparents etc. We can express that every such chain has to be spanned by a hasGrandparent property as follows:

Functional-Style Syntax
 SubObjectPropertyOf( 
   ObjectPropertyChain( :hasParent :hasParent ) 
   :hasGrandparent 
 )

 a new datatype can be generated by just enumerating the data values it contains.

  DatatypeDefinition(
   :toddlerAge
   DataOneOf( "1"^^xsd:integer "2"^^xsd:integer ) 
 ) 

 An OWL annotation simply associates property-value pairs with parts of an ontology, or the entire ontology itself. Even annotations themselves can be annotated. Annotation information is not really part of the logical meaning of an ontology.

 an IRI may denote different entity-types (e.g. both an individual and a class) at the same time. This possibility, called “punning,” has been introduced to allow for a certain amount of metamodeling.

 One can see OWL 2 DL as a syntactically restricted version of OWL 2 Full where the restrictions are designed to make life easier for implementors.

 One can see OWL 2 Full as the most straightforward extension of RDFS.

 Note that in the first statement, Father is used as a class, while in the second it is used as an individual. In this sense, SocialRole acts as a metaclass for the class Father.

  OWL 2, in general, is a very expressive language (both computationally and for users) and thus can be difficult to implement well and to work with.

OWL 2 EL is designed with large biohealth ontologies in mind, such as SNOMED-CT, the NCI thesaurus, and Galen. OWL 2 EL shines when your domain and your application require recognition of structurally complex objects. Such domains include system configurations, product inventories, and many scientific domains.

OWL 2 QL can be realized using standard relational database technology (e.g., SQL) simply by expanding queries in the light of class axioms.The QL acronym reflects the fact that query answering in this profile can be implemented by rewriting queries into a standard relational Query Language [DL-Lite].

The OWL 2 RL profile is aimed at applications that require scalable reasoning without sacrificing too much expressive power.

Among other constructs, OWL 2 RL disallows statements where the existence of an individual enforces the existence of another individual: for instance, the statement “every person has a parent” is not expressible in OWL RL.

 For learning more about the foundations of OWL, we recommend to consult first a textbook [FOST] and then the original articles cited therein.
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q102929379)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q102929379)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q102929379/P921%3BP4510)  
