
Integrated Morphoelectric and Transcriptomic Classification of Cortical GABAergic Cells
=======================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q102056745]  

# Highlights

Neurons are frequently classified into distinct groups or cell types on the basis of structural, physiological, or genetic attributes. To better constrain the definition of neuronal cell types, we characterized the transcriptomes and intrinsic physiological properties of over 3,700 GABAergic mouse visual cortical neurons and reconstructed the local morphologies of 350 of those neurons.

Patch-seq data obtained from >3,700 GABAergic cortical interneurons

The mammalian brain contains many millions, and in some cases billions, of neurons. No two neurons are identical, yet neurons are regularly categorized into classes and types based on a variety of criteria. This cell type categorization is both logistically and conceptually advantageous for understanding how cells and circuits enable brain function.

transcriptomically-defined types of GABAergic interneurons are more readily conserved across cortical brain areas (Tasic et al., 2018). Third, the number of GABAergic cell types estimated from our scRNASeq data (Tasic et al., 2018) and morpho-electric data (Gouwens et al., 2019) collected in mouse primary visual cortex (VISp)- i.e., the number of VISp GABAergic “t-types” (60) and “me-types” (26) - dif- fers by more than a factor of two.

using highly specific transgenic driver lines, we were able to correlate some transcriptomic types (t-types) with some well-known or newly defined morpho-electric types (me-types)

(4) can a finite number of cell types be defined with maximal congruence across modalities (or are cell “types” infinitely divisible, or too continuous to subdivide)?

The steps included first preparing a VISp-specific hierarchically-organized reference tree (based on transcriptomes from dissociated cells from VISp of our previous transcriptomic study), which contained 93 t-types, and choosing marker genes for the mapping - i.e., the genes that best distinguished groups at each branch of the tree. Next, we mapped Patch-seq transcriptomes to the reference tree via a bootstrap approach in which only 70% of the available genes and reference cells were used in each of 100 iterations.

--> Semi-explicit tree assumption.

To distinguish between “expected” and “unexpected” ambiguity in mapping between t-types, we computed the reference mapping probability matrix between t-types (defined as the probabil- ity of a cell type being confused with other cell types in the reference dissociated cell data set).

--> Sound method, but the theory is hazy.

We calculated 12 “feature vectors,” capturing properties such as action potential shape and normalized response to hyperpolarizing current indicative of sag potential (Figure 3A), from various aspects of the electrophysiological data.

For a subset (350 cells) of transcriptomically and electrophysiologically characterized neurons from the Sst, Pvalb, Vip, Sncg, and Lamp5 subclasses, we also performed morphological analysis.

To test how consistent morphologies were within a t-type, we measured the correlation between an in- dividual cell’s axon histogram and the t-type average (Figure 4B). Most cells were positively correlated, indicating consistent axonal innervation patterns.

--> "Most" means not all!

We trained random forest classifiers on all 44 electrophysiology sPCs to predict either transcriptomic sub- class or t-type. The subclass classifier performed at >90% accuracy (Figure 5A), indicating that GABAergic transcriptomic subclasses have distinctive electrophysiological features.However, the t-type classifier had a prediction accuracy of 57% (Figure 5B), and prediction error rates varied considerably across t-types.

--> Not 100%

We identified nine met-types within the Sst subclass. The first one (the left-most column in the top row of Figure 7) — mapped to the Sst Chodl t-type, generally occupied deeper layers, and corresponded to non-Martinotti, long-range projecting interneurons (Tasic et al., 2018; Paul et al., 2017; He et al., 2016). The second met-type comprised cells mapping to Sst Tac1 Htr1d with electrophysiological properties most rem- iniscent of Pvalb interneurons. These cells had APs with low upstroke/downstroke ratios and little axonal innervation of L1. A previous study also observed that cells of this t-type had fast-spiking-like firing prop- erties (Scala et al., 2019). The third met-type contained cells mapping to Sst Calb2 Pdlim5, which were found in cortical layers L2/3 to L5 and exhibited the most exuberant axonal elaborations in L1. As men- tioned, this met-type reflects the well-described Martinotti-type neurons, and includes cells that resemble the recently described L2/3 Martinotti and L5/6 fanning-out Martinotti cells.

This unprecedented dataset, freely available to the public in June of 2020, enables a broad range of analyses: a major goal of generating, curating, and releasing this resource is to facilitate others’ analyses and interpretations. We hope that detailed analyses of these data will enable individuals familiar with collecting and interpreting one type of data (e.g., electrophysiological data) to better interpret it in the context of other studies.

it is worth noting that some of the ambiguity in types could be biological rather than technical, such that focusing our analysis this way may overly-discretize a landscape with more continuous variation between cells and cell types

The number of archetypal interneuron groups might also change as additional information about cellular and circuit properties is collected. This could include further refinement of the transcriptomic taxonomy profiled under different states, more detailed electrophysiological and morphological characterization, the addition of proteomic information, local and long-range synaptic connectivity, and (in vivo) functional characterization.

# Comments
(bioRxiv version)
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q102056745)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q102056745)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q102056745/P921%3BP4510)  
