
Integration of the Drug-Gene Interaction Database (DGIdb 4.0) with open crowdsource efforts
===========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q102383722]  
  
Publication date : 25 of November, 2020  

# Highlights

A primary focus of this update was integration with crowdsourced efforts, leveraging the Drug Target Commons for community-contributed interaction data, Wikidata to facilitate term normalization, and export to NDEx for drug-gene interaction network representations.

--> - 1.3.3.1 Life sciences projects that use Wikidata

In this release, we have made an effort to integrate crowdsourced data and sources in several areas, including the addition of the crowdsourced Drug Target Commons (4) as a drug-gene interaction source, and the use of the open, community-curated Wikidata (5) resource for drug normalization

Wikidata serves as a source of collaborative, crowdsourced drug concepts, and has allowed us to improve normalization in cases where ChEMBL normalization failed.

Among our contributions to thera-py was a normalizer for the Wikidata (5) resource, further enabling community contributions to assist in concept normalization both for DGIdb and other resources reliant upon the VICC normalization services.

Drug claims from DGIdb were normalized using the ChEMBL and Wikidata normalizers from thera-py. Rules were written to formalize grouper behavior based upon match characteristics of a query. 

Inclusion of directionality can make it easier for users to distinguish interactions that are more relevant for their purposes. For example, a user interested in exploring drugs that inhibit a particular gene will look for drug-gene interactions with inhibitory directionality. Users are also able to limit their interaction search to only interaction types of a desired directionality. Detailed information on each interaction type, the definition of each interaction type, and the directionality of each interaction are also available on the DGIdb Interaction Types page (https://dgidb.org/interaction_types).


In DGIdb 4.0, we have made a significant effort to update and improve the information we provide on licensing of sources imported into our database


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q102383722)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q102383722)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q102383722&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/NAR/GKAA1084)  
