
WikiPathways: connecting communities
====================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q102205677]  

# Highlights
WikiPathways is a database of biological pathway models collected and curated by the research community. Any- one at any time can contribute their pathway knowledge using freely available pathway editing tools.

We also present several research communities that we have collaborated with and empowered, including the COVID- 19 Disease Map project (8), LIPID MAPS (9) and the rare disease community. Furthermore, to strengthen community building and curation, we started organizing monthly Curation Cafe events focused on selected topics, e.g. improving the quality of existing or creating novel pathways.

The computer-assisted cu- ration tools are used effectively and its repertoire of tests has been expanded to better support the ongoing curation efforts and challenges in the WikiPathways database (https://github.com/BiGCAT-UM/WikiPathwaysCurator)

All pathways receive a tag specifically for their community, allowing for automated downloads of these pathway collections through the REST API (http: //webservice.wikipathways.org) with the ‘getCurationTags- ByName’ function, and our RDF format with SPARQL queries (http://rdf.wikipathways.org,(6)).

We have started a collaboration with the authors of the book ‘Physician’s Guide to the Diagnosis, Treatment, and Follow-Up of In- herited Metabolic Diseases’ (21) and are currently process- ing all included pathways, as well as integrating these in the IEMbase (22).

Annotating individual lipids instead of lipid classes can be quite complicated; this phenomenon is  in most cases due to a lack of biological knowledge on indi- vidual lipids. Furthermore, several cases are known where homology mapping between different species for proteins is hampered, e.g. for stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 having four isoforms in mice compared to only two in humans.

The pathway viewer widget was updated and moved to Wikimedia Toolforge allowing users to integrate the path- ways fromWikiPathways into their own website with more ease (http://widget.wikipathways.org)

WikiPathways SNORQL is a query editor that offers syntax highlighting for writ- ing and executing SPARQL queries directly on our ex- isting SPARQL endpoint (http://sparql.wikipathways.org/ sparql).

The CC0 license of WikiPathways also enabled interop- erability through Wikidata, the linked data repository of Wikipedia (31).

The WikiPathways bot creates Wikidata items for each pathway and the content thereof in WikiPathways and aligns those with the Wikidata items on associated genes, proteins, metabolites, literature cita- tions, and ontology annotations (e.g. https://www.wikidata. org/wiki/Q28031254). TheWikiPathways content ofthe hu- man pathway analysis collection in Wikidata gets updated after each monthly release.

In collaboration with the Scholia team, we devel- oped Scholia templates for WikiPathways pathways and all pathways in Wikidata are now also addressable as Scho- lia topic pages https://scholia.toolforge.org/wikipathways/ WP111

Nanopublications for WikiPathways have been released for several years now in collaboration with their international community (35). The nanopublications are created using a combination of nanopub-java library (36) and SPARQL queries against the WikiPathways RDF (see https://github. com/wikipathways/nanopublications). This results in three types of nanopublications, for three types of facts in WikiPathways: complexes, interactions, and general partic- ipation in pathways.

We release a standard Gene Matrix Transposed (GMT) file each month that includes the latest set of curated pathways approved for enrichment use cases.

A number of R pack- ages and online tools that perform enrichment analysis have incorporated WikiPathways into their methods and vignette examples.

Biological Expression Language (BEL) project (48) are harmonizing the infor- mation of different pathway databases including WikiPathways.

The Network Data Exchange (NDEx) is a public resource for publishing and sharing biological networks and gene sets (53), and WikiPathways is closely collaborating with the NDEx team. First, we regularly deposit the WikiPath- ways human pathway analysis collection into a dedicated collection at NDEx.

We are contributing curated and published path- way information to the NCATS’ Biomedical Data Trans- lator program (54) using the BioThingsExplorer (https:// biothings-explorer.readthedocs.io) and Smart API (55).

A wide variety of third-party analytical tools utilizes the content distributed by WikiPathways, creating an immea- surable user base. WikiPathways is defined by the people authoring, curating and utilizing pathway knowledge. We invite all researchers interested in pathways to directly par- ticipate in the WikiPathways project.

# Comments
