
Definitions
===========
  
  [@wikidata:Q102232524]  

# Highlights

 Some of these debates can be settled by making requisite distinctions, for definitions are not all of one kind: definitions serve a variety of functions, and their general character varies with function. Some other debates, however, are not so easily settled, as they involve contentious philosophical ideas such as essence, concept, and meaning.


Different kinds of things are objects of definition here: boundary, legal status, substance, word, thesis, and abstract kind. Moreover, the different definitions do not all have the same goal.

John Locke distinguished, in his Essay, “real essence” from “nominal essence.” Nominal essence, according to Locke, is the “abstract Idea to which the Name is annexed (III.vi.2). The real essence of gold is “the constitution of the insensible parts of that Body, on which those Qualities [mentioned in the nominal essence] and all other Properties of Gold depend (III.vi.2).

 Perhaps it is helpful to indicate the distinction between real and nominal definitions thus: to discover the real definition of a term 
X  one needs to investigate the thing or things denoted by X ; to discover the nominal definition, one needs to investigate the meaning and use of X.

Definitions sought by philosophers are not of the sort found in a dictionary. Frege’s definition of number (1884) and Alfred Tarski’s definition of truth (1983, ch. 8) are not offered as candidates for dictionary entries. The philosophical quest for definition can sometimes fruitfully be characterized as a search for an explanation of meaning

A stipulative definition imparts a meaning to the defined term, and involves no commitment that the assigned meaning agrees with prior uses (if any) of the term. If one stipulatively defines a “raimex” as, say, a rational, imaginative, experiencing being then the judgment “raimexes are rational” is assured of being necessary, certain, and a priori.

--> My definition of cell type (and the definitions of cell types terms it imparts) go in that direction. 

Descriptive definitions, like stipulative ones, spell out meaning, but they also aim to be adequate to existing usage

A definition is extensionally adequate iff there are no actual counterexamples to it; it is intensionally adequate iff there are no possible counterexamples to it; and it is sense adequate (or analytic) iff it endows the defined term with the right sense.

--> I guess "complete" definitions are analytic, sense-adequate.


Sometimes a definition is offered neither descriptively nor stipulatively but as, what Rudolf Carnap (1956, §2) called, an explication. An explication aims to respect some central uses of a term but is stipulative on others. The explication may be offered as an absolute improvement of an existing, imperfect concept. Or, it may be offered as a “good thing to mean” by the term in a specific context for a particular purpose. (The quoted phrase is due to Alan Ross Anderson; see Belnap 1993, 117.)

--> Seems like a compromise humans can make, but computers may not (at least easily).

Ostensive definitions typically depend on context and on experience. Suppose the conversational context renders one dog salient among several that are visible. Then one can introduce the name ‘Freddie’ through the stipulation “let Freddie be this dog.

--> I guess cell type terms are currently implicit, ostensive definitions, which partially match across individuals. 

An ostensive definition can bring about an essential enrichment of a language. The ostensive definition of ‘Charlie’ enriches the language with a name of a particular insect, and it could well be that before the enrichment the language lacked resources to denote that particular insect.

The capacity of ostensive definitions to introduce essentially new vocabulary has led some thinkers to view them as the source of all primitive concepts.

The kinds into which we have sorted definitions are not mutually exclusive, nor exhaustive.

Many definitions—stipulative, descriptive, and explicative—can be analyzed into three elements: the term that is defined (X), an expression containing the defined term (…X…), and another expression (--------------)
 that is equated by the definition with this expression. Such definitions can be represented thus:

X: … X … = --------------

The expression on the left-hand side is the definiendum of the definition, and the expression on the right-hand side is its definiens.

It is sometimes said that definitions are mere recipes for abbreviations. Thus, Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell say of definitions—in particular, those used in Principia Mathematica—that they are “strictly speaking, typographical conveniences (1925, 11).

First, a stipulative definition should not enable us to establish essentially new claims—call this the Conservativeness criterion.

Second, the definition should fix the use of the defined expression X —call this the Use criterion. This criterion is plausible, since only the definition—and nothing else—is available to guide us in the use of X.

The traditional account of definitions:

- definitions are generalized identities
any occurrence of the definiendum can be replaced by an occurrence of the definiens (Generalized Definiendum Elimination); and, conversely, (ii) any occurrence of the definiens can be replaced by an occurrence of the definiendum (Generalized Definiendum Introduction).

-the primacy of the sentential
if we understand the use of a defined term in assertion and argument then we fully grasp the term

The third idea—reduction—is that the use of a formula Z  containing the defined term is explained by reducing Z to a formula in the ground language. This idea, when conjoined with the primacy of the sentential, leads to a strong version of the Use criterion, called the Eliminability criterion: the definition must reduce each formula containing the defined term to a formula in the ground language, i.e., one free of the defined term. Eliminability is the distinctive thesis of the traditional account and, as we shall see below, it can be challenged.

any formula of L that is provable using definition D is also provable without using D: the definition does not enable us to prove anything new in L.

several different, non-equivalent formulations of the two criteria are possible within each framework, the syntactic and the semantic

Call two definitions equivalent iff they yield the same theorems in the expanded language. Then, it can be shown that if D meets the criteria of Conservativeness and Eliminability then D is equivalent to a definition in normal form as specified below.

This is perfectly legitimate, according to the traditional account, because a theorem of Peano Arithmetic establishes that the above definition is equivalent to one in normal form.[10] Recursive definitions are circular in their format, and indeed it is this circularity that renders them perspicuous. But the circularity is entirely on the surface, as the existence of normal forms shows.

It is sometimes suggested that a term X  can be introduced axiomatically, that is, by laying down as axioms certain sentences of the expanded language L+. The axioms are then said to implicitly define X.

--> I thought that this was the case for cell type terms, but then realized they are largely not coherent.r

(i) It is plain that some violations of Conservativeness are illegitimate: one cannot make it true by a stipulation that, e.g., Mercury is larger than Venus. Now, if a philosophical application requires some violations of Conservativeness to be legitimate, we need an account of the distinction between the two sorts of cases: the legitimate violations of Conservativeness and the non-legitimate ones.

Another departure from the traditional theory begins with the idea not that the theory is too strict, but that it is too liberal, that it permits definitions that are illegitimate. Russell argued that such definitions involve a subtle kind of vicious circle.

Vicious-Circle Principle. “Whatever involves all of a collection must not be one of the collection (Russell 1908, 63).”
Another formulation Russell gave of the Principle is this:

Vicious-Circle Principle (variant formulation). “If, provided a certain collection had a total, it would have members only definable in terms of that total, then the said collection has no total (Russell, 1908, 63).”

In an appended footnote, Russell explained, “When I say that a collection has no total, I mean that statements about all its members are nonsense.

# Comments

I only skimmed a part of the more intense logical calculations.


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q102232524)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q102232524)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q102232524/P921%3BP4510)  
