
OWL 2 Web Ontology Language Document Overview (Second Edition)
==============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q102926772]  

# Highlights
This document provides a non-normative high-level overview of the OWL 2 Web Ontology Language and serves as a roadmap for the documents that define and describe OWL 2.

Like OWL 1, OWL 2 is designed to facilitate ontology development and sharing via the Web, with the ultimate goal of making Web content more accessible to machines.

While RDF/XML provides for interoperability among OWL 2 tools, other concrete syntaxes may also be used. These include alternative RDF serializations, such as Turtle [Turtle]; an XML serialization [OWL 2 XML]; and a more "readable" syntax, called the Manchester Syntax [OWL 2 Manchester Syntax]

The Direct Semantics assigns meaning directly to ontology structures, resulting in a semantics compatible with the model theoretic semantics of the SROIQ description logic—a fragment of first order logic with useful computational properties.

The RDF-Based Semantics [OWL 2 RDF-Based Semantics] assigns meaning directly to RDF graphs and so indirectly to ontology structures via the Mapping to RDF graphs.

OWL 2 Profiles [OWL 2 Profiles] are sub-languages (syntactic subsets) of OWL 2 that offer important advantages in particular application scenarios. Three different profiles are defined: OWL 2 EL, OWL 2 QL, and OWL 2 RL. 

Any OWL 2 EL, QL or RL ontology is, of course, also an OWL 2 ontology and can be interpreted using either the Direct or RDF-Based Semantics.

OWL 2 adds new functionality with respect to OWL 1. Some of the new features are syntactic sugar (e.g., disjoint union of classes) while others offer new expressivity, including:

- keys;
- property chains;
- richer datatypes, data ranges;
- qualified cardinality restrictions;
- asymmetric, reflexive, and disjoint properties; and
- enhanced annotation capabilities


These documents are, however, all rather technical and mainly aimed at OWL 2 implementers and tool developers. Those looking for a more approachable guide to the features and usage of OWL 2 may prefer to consult one of the user documents (Primer, New Features and Rationale, and Quick Reference Guide).

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q102926772)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q102926772)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q102926772/P921%3BP4510)  
