
The STRING database in 2021: customizable protein-protein networks, and functional characterization of user-uploaded gene/measurement sets
==========================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q102383784]  
  
Publication date : 25 of November, 2020  

# Highlights

 # Comments

STRING collects and scores evidence from a number of sources: 
(i) automated text mining of the scientific literature 
(ii) databases of interaction experiments and annotated complexes/pathways, 
(iii) computational interaction predictions from co-expression and from conserved genomic context and 
(iv) systematic transfers of interaction evidence from one organism to another.

sources of interaction evidence fall into three broad classes: 
(i) prior knowledge—as available from curated pathway databases, or more generally from scientific publications,
(ii) computational interaction predictions—from a variety of algorithms and 
(iii) direct lab experiments, using a variety of assays in both low- or high-throughput.

All network items and scores, as well as all generated images and tables are freely available without restrictions, under the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license.

--> Not really without restrictions.

 STRING has been selected as one of the European Core Data Resources by the ELIXIR consortium (32), is heavily cross-linked with other resources both within and outside of ELIXIR and is currently used by about 5000 distinct users per day.

--> Cool

All interaction evidence in STRING is thematically grouped into ‘channels’ (such as text mining, co-expression, lab experiments); these can be individually disabled by the user.

Version 11.5 of STRING updates the organism coverage to 14 094, and includes a full re-import and re-scoring of all evidence types. 

--> Cool

While protein–protein associations in STRING by definition are functional, i.e. not necessarily physical interactions, the organization of proteins in a physical complex provides particularly strong evidence for their biological relationship.

As an additional control, we also benchmarked the human text-mined interactions against the human protein complexes in Complex Portal. The fact that the resulting relationship between the raw text-mining and physical interaction scores is similar for the two distant organisms further supports our decision to use one calibration curve for all organisms.

Future work in STRING will include options to prune the networks down to specific cell-types or tissues based on gene expression information, as well as further expansions of the functional enrichment detection to additional classification systems and more complex types of user input.

--> Nice!! The cell type specific STRING networks will be awesome.

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q102383784)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q102383784)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q102383784/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q102383784&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/NAR/GKAA1074)  
