
FR-Match: robust matching of cell type clusters from single cell RNA sequencing data using the Friedman-Rafsky non-parametric test
==================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q103045800]  

# Highlights

Here, we introduce a cluster-to-cluster cell type matching method—FR-Match—that utilizes supervised feature selection for dimensionality reduction and incorporates shared information among cells to determine whether two cell type clusters share the same underlying multivariate gene expression distribution

n R package and Shiny application are provided at https://github.com/JCVenterInstitute/FRmatch for users to interactively explore and match scRNAseq cell type clusters with complementary visualization tools

Here, we present a supervised cell phenotype matching
strategy, called FR-Match, for cluster-to-cluster cell transcriptome integration across scRNAseq experiments.

We then use FR-Match to match brain cell types defined in the full thickness of human middle temporal gyrus (MTG) neocortex with cell types defined in a Layer 1 dissection of MTG using public datasets from the Cell Types Database of the Allen Brain Map.

We adopted the NS-Forest algorithm [14]v2.0(https://github. com/JCVenterInstitute/NSForest) to select informative marker genes for a given cell type cluster. Applying NS-Forest feature selection to the cortical Layer 1 and full thickness MTG datasets produced a collection of 34 and 157 marker genes that, in combination, can distinguish the 16 cortical Layer 1 [28]and 75 full MTG [29] cell type clusters, respectively.

Although NS-Forest was used for marker gene selection here, FR-Match is compatible with any feature selec- tion/dimensionality reduction approach that selects informative cluster classification features.

Accurate cell type determination from scRNAseq analysis is dependent on accurate partitioning of the cellular tran- scriptomes into clusters based on their similarity. Existing

--> not necessarily

Using FR-Match, we mapped each of the 13 Layer 1 cell types uniquely to one MTG cell type (Figure 5a), i.e. 1-to-1 two- way matches. These matches precisely reflect the overlapping anatomic regions in these two independent experiments in that the matched MTG cell types all have an ‘L1’ layer indicator in their nomenclature. The one exception for the Layer 1 e1 cluster likely reflects the incidental capture of upper cortical layer 2 excitatory neurons in the original Layer 1 experiment [28].

--> Nice result! 

For example, the ‘Inh_L1_2_PAX6_CDH12’ from the MTG dataset means the inhibitory neurons located in layer 1–2 within the PAX6- subclass/subbranch expressing CDH12. The leaf node marker genes are preferentially selected by a binary scoring scheme [29] different from the one used by NS-Forest. Thus, the ‘cell type naming genes’ provide an alternative informative marker gene set

The negative effect of under-partitioned clusters also applies to the nested classes of heterogeneous cell types


Automated cell type integration of independent scRNAseq datasets remains challenging. Creating an unbiased, high-resolution and comprehensive cell type reference would be a critical task for the whole single cell research community. Consensus mapping schemes that survey both cell-level and cluster-level matchings will be useful for establishing such a reference data atlas. We believe that final mapping of the brain cell types agreed upon by the type of bi-directionally and multi- level matchings reported here represents the best-practice for computational cell type mapping, requiring minimal expert intervention.


### The cell type matching problem

The cell type matching problem is whether a pair of query and reference cell clusters identified in related but independen texperiments are instances of the same ordifferent transcriptionally defined cell phenotypes.

--> If they were actually transcriptionally _defined_, no allignment would be necessary. They are mostly transcriptionally-based, human-labeled arbitrary types.

Feature selection plays a key role in scRNAseq data integration of cell type clusters; using supervised fea- ture selection instead of approaches based on dropout rates significantly improves the performance of exist- ing cell type matching methods, e.g. ‘scmap’.


# Comments

Mixes cell types and cell clusters a lot.


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q103045800)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q103045800)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q103045800/P921%3BP4510)  
