
Identification and characterization of distinct brown adipocyte subtypes in C57BL/6J mice
=========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q103800764]  

# Highlights

--> Nice infratype scoping!!

we use single-cell RNA sequencing of the BAT stromal vascular fraction of C57/BL6mice and characterize brown preadipocyte and adipocyte clonal cell lines.

We confirm the presence of distinct brown adipocyte populations in vivo using the markers EIF5, TCF25, and BIN1. We also demonstrate that loss of Bin1 enhances UCP1 expression and mitochondrial respiration, suggesting that BIN1 marks dormant brown adipocytes.

Sebo and colleagues, reported that in addition to Pax3+/Myf5+ cells, a minor fraction of interscapular brown adipocytes derive from the central dermomyotome expressing Pax7 and Myf5 (13). Thus, these data suggest that more than one brown adipocyte precursor cell population might exist, albeit the current dogma suggests a single precursor population (12).

These findings also raise the question if murine BAT is, as commonly believed, composed of one brown adipocyte lineage, or a mixture of brown adipocytes derived from multiple lineages.

UCP1 is the most specific and selective marker for murine and human BAT (28).

--> Again, multispecies gene class! Dang these are common.

Louvain clustering ofthe gene expression of 4,013 cells identified
12 distinct clusters (Fig 1C and Supplemental Data 1). Using sets of marker genes we identified several immune cell populations (Fig 1C and Supplemental Data 1)

--> Nice separation of clusters from populations (which seem to mean 'type' in this case)

To overcome the limitations of a static experimental setup such as scRNAseq, we established 67 clonal cell lines, derived from the SV40 large-T immortalized SVF of three 8-wk-old male C57BL/6J mice. Most cell lines, when differentiated for 8 d, accumulated lipids,

several clones (1B1, 1B3 and 1B6, 2C12, 3C7 and 3D6) that diverged and showed higher Pparg expression than anticipated from the lipid content. In line with the function of PPARG in driving brown adi- pocyte selective gene expression, clones 1B3, 1B6, 2B11, 2C7, 2C12, 3C7, and 3D6 showed highest Ucp1 expression compared to all other clones (Fig 3A)

--> Interesting method, just let the cells drift.

Next, we tested expression of additional markers for brown
(PRDM16 and PPARGC1A), beige (TMEM26 and CD137) adipocytes (17, 34)

the data obtained from these 67 clonal brown adipocyte cell lines strongly suggested functional and developmental heterogeneity.

We selected the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5 (EIF5), transcription factor 25 (TCF25), and bridging integrator 1 (BIN1) to test as potential lineage markers from the stably expressed 57 genes, based on BATness, in combination with the maximum ex- pression and fold change in our clonal cell lines as well as the availability of antibodies.

Figure 6. EIF5, TCF25, and BIN1 mark subsets of brown adipocytes

expression of Eif5 and Tcf25 was increased upon chronic cold ex- posure, whereas Bin1 expression remained unaltered

To investigate the distribution of the selected marker genes in relation to UCP1 in mature adipocytes in vivo, we performed co-immunostainings for EIF5, TCF25, and BIN1 with UCP1 on murine BAT sections. EIF5 expression correlated with UCP1 staining intensity (Fig 6F). Following our quantification strategy applied for UCP1 (Fig 1A), we quantified EIF5 expression in individual brown adipocytes and grouped the cells according to high, medium, low, and very low expression, with around 1/4 of the brown adipocytes showing high or very high expression (Figs 6G

In the current study, we aimed to clarify the presence of distinct brown adipocyte lineages in mice. We find that even at room temperature, where murine BAT appears morphologically uniform, UCP1 expression within individual brown adipocytes differs greatly throughout the tissue. To this end, we tested if differences in UCP1 content are the result of developmental heterogeneity among murine brown adipocytes and not due to anatomical or environ- mental differences.

In conclusion, we provide the first evidence for the existence of at
least three functionally distinct brown adipocyte subtypes in mice that differ in their activation state (mitochondrial uncoupling and Ucp1 expression) and provide a rich resource of data to extract and use this information for additional analysis. These data will foster translation by providing novel approaches to “humanize” murine BAT. Moreover, the presence of multiple human brown adipocyte subtypes and potential differences in the cellular composition be- tween individuals or upon obesity and the metabolic syndrome could provide novel strategies for personalized obesity therapy.

Schematic illustration of brown adipose tissue heterogeneity: Murine brown adipose tissue is composed of functionally distinct brown adipocytes. We identify EIF5 expressing brown adipocytes as “classical” brown adipocytes, with high UCP1 content and mitochondrial uncoupling. TCF25 expressing brown adipocytes are similar, albeit with lower UCP1 expression. In contrast, BIN1-expressing brown adipocytes appear in a dormant state, expressing low UCP1 levels with little response to beta adrenergic stimulation. However, loss of BIN1 or chemical mitochondrial uncoupling reveals high thermogenic capacity of these cells. Subpopulations of brown adipocytes are color coded regarding to their thermogenic capacity, with the highest shown in dark brown (Eif5high), followed by brown (Tcf25high) and light brown (Bin1high) (=indicates unchanged expression).


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q103800764)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q103800764)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q103800764/P921%3BP4510)  
