
Converting neXtProt into Linked Data and nanopublications
=========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q103834013]  

# Highlights

we have developed the neXtProt Linked Data by serializing in RDF/XML annotations specific to neXtProt and started employing the nanopublication model to give appropriate attribution to all data.
Specifically, a use case demonstrates the handling of post-translational modification (PTM) data modeled as nanopublications to illustrate how the different levels of provenance and data quality thresholds can be captured in this model.

To help users rapidly assess the most reliable data, neXtProt provides quality rankings for different levels of data.
“neXtProt Gold” data are of highest quality, accord- ing to the biocurator’s judgment. When it is possible to assess the data quality through quantitative criteria, the threshold for inclusion in the Gold category are with error rates estimated at less than 1%.

Attribution or prove- nance information present in a nanopublication about who created and published the data, and how it was produced, will also provide several means for quality assessment, an important concern with Linked Data sets.

1) To show an initial conversion of the neXtProt data to RDF to provide interaction with the po- tential Semantic Web user community (starting with the Open PHACTS project), and
2) To provide the nanopublication approach for connecting semantics with the sequence posi- tions of post translational modifications (PTMs) present in protein isoforms with the correspond- ing provenance information.

Unlike UniProtKB entries, which are based on a master sequence, the data model for neXtProt was developed to present the data corresponding to the specific pro- tein isoform. The data model design represents a tight integration of semantically similar data because all information, for example, the position-specific anno- tations for functional relationships on the amino acid level and sequence polymorphism information are presented in the context of the specific protein iso- form.

--> Nice. I like this degree of granularity. It is more professional, I feel.

The currrent RDF Linked Data set contains apprroximately 97 million triples attributed to over 38,000
protein isoform entries.

For the neXtProt nanopublication, the assertion is the minimal unit of information to describe the PTM for a specific protein isoform. It states that there is a modification on one specific amino acid in a specific protein isoform with a specific type of post- translational modification (Fig. 4).

--> States that a PTM exists in the real world. Is this assertion challengeable? According to the classic AAA standards, that question is solved by the client, using tools like reputation of assertion providers.

URIs for neXtProt gold and silver concepts were generated by adding these concepts to the ConceptWiki [7]. The ConceptWiki is a system that allows the minting of URLs that can be used as resources for concepts that are not included in any formal ontology

:NX_P35916-2_PTM-0255_1063 a np:Nanopublication.
:NX_P35916-2_PTM-0255_1063 np:hasAssertion :NX_P35916-2_PTM-0255_1063_assertion ; np:hasProvenance :NX_P35916-2_PTM-0255_1063_provenance ; np:hasPublicationInfo :NX_P35916-2_PTM-0255_1063_publicationInfo .
:NX_P35916-2_PTM-0255_1063_assertion a np:Assertion . :NX_P35916-2_PTM-0255_1063_provenance a np:Provenance . :NX_P35916-2_PTM-0255_1063_publicationInfo a np:PublicationInfo .
:NX_P35916-2_PTM-0255_1063_assertion {:NX_P35916-2_PTM-0255_1063_PTM-Modif bp:participant nextprot:NX_P35916-2, ptm:PTM-0255 ; sio:SIO_000008 [ a range:RangedSequencePosition ;
sio:SIO_000053 [ a range:StartPosition; sio:SIO_000300 1063 ] ; sio:SIO_000053 [ a range:EndPosition; sio:SIO_000300 1063 ] ; ] ;
rdfs:comment "Phosphotyrosine modification of amino acid 1063 of Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3 isoform 2 (Homo sapiens)."^^xsd:string ; a bp:MolecularInteraction .
ptm:PTM-0255 owl:sameAs psimod:MOD:00048 . }
:NX_P35916-2_PTM-0255_1063_provenance {:NX_P35916-2_PTM-0255_1063_assertion prov:wasDerivedFrom uniprot:P35916 ; prov:wasGeneratedBy eco:ECO:0000218 ;
prov:PrimarySource <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18083107> ; wi:evidence <http://www.conceptwiki.org/concept/UUID-neXtProt Gold> . <http://www.conceptwiki.org/concept/neXtProt Gold> rdf:type eco:ECO:000205 ; rdfs:label"neXtProt Gold"^^xsd:string .
}
:NX_P35916-2_PTM-0255_1063_publicationInfo {:NX_P35916-2_PTM-0255_1063 prov:wasGeneratedBy eco:ECO:0000248 ;


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q103834013)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q103834013)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q103834013/P921%3BP4510)  
