
Single-cell sequencing of the human midbrain reveals glial activation and a neuronal state specific to Parkinson's disease
==========================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104552303]  

# Highlights

Profiled >41,000 single-nuclei transcriptomes of postmortem midbrain tissue from 6 idiopathic PD (IPD) patients and 5 matched controls.

IPD-microglia revealed a specific pro-inflammatory trajectory. Finally, we discovered a neuronal cell cluster exclusively present in IPD midbrains characterized by CADPS2 overexpression and a high proportion of cycling cells.

We performed snRNA-seq of postmortem adult human midbrain tissue of IPD patients and age-matched healthy controls.

Postmortem intervals, IPD ~22, and controls ~16 hours

We found that this overall cluster structure was mostly driven by cell-type identity and the inter-sample variability.

Using this corrected PCA embedding and the unsupervised and network-based Louvain clustering approach, we found that the human midbrain comprises 12 major cell types.

- Oligodendrocytes, the most abundant cell-type in the midbrain are characterized by the expression of MOBP 
- oligodendrocyte precursors cells (OPCs) highly express VCAN 
-  Expression of AQP4 is characteristic of astrocytes 
- FOXJ1 of ependymal cells 
- CD74 in microglia 
- CLDN5 in endothelial cells  
- PDGFRB in pericytes 
- excitatory ( SLC17A6 ) 
- inhibitory ( GAD2 ) 
- GABAergic ( GAD2 / GRIK1 ) 
- dopaminergic neurons( TH )

We also discovered a neuronal cluster of 120 cells, which we could not annotate, characterized by high expression of CADPS2 (CADPS2 high
cells). These cells almost exclusively originated from IPD patients (IPD, 98.4%; control, 1.6%).

We labeled microglia and astrocytes with antibodies against their marker proteins IBA1 and GFAP, respectively.

To validate DaN degeneration in the IPD tissue with an independent approach, we quantified the area of MAP2+/TH+/NM+ and MAP2+/TH-/NM+ neurons.

Finally, we discovered a new disease-specific cell state that is defined by translational similarity to midbrain DaNs but with low TH levels and high CADPS2 expression.

Immunofluorescence analysis revealed that CADPS2 high neurons are localized to the SN and that they harbour neuromelanin deposits.

In addition to high levels of CADPS2 , the IPD-specific neuronal population was characterized by elevated TIAM1 expression.

We discovered a novel neuronal cell state that was almost exclusively identified in IPD midbrain tissue.

The top marker genes were used to assign cell-type annotations manually for each cell cluster. We compared the cell types by correlating their pseudo bulk profiles.


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104552303)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104552303)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104552303/P921%3BP4510)  
