
Single-Cell Sequencing of Developing Human Gut Reveals Transcriptional Links to Childhood Crohn's Disease
=========================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104130336]  
  
Publication date : 01 of December, 2020  

# Highlights

Elmentaite and Ross et al. generated adetailed single-cell RNA-seq map of thedeveloping human intestine

The study provides a unique resourceaccessible to all researchers atwww.gutcellatlas.org


Cycling BEX5+ epithelial precursors are distinct from adultLGR5+ stem cells


n the adult intestine, LGR5 is a marker of stem cells that resideat the bottom of intestinal crypts and give rise to all epithelial cellsubsets (Barker et al., 2007). The ability to generate self-orga-nizing intestinal epithelial organoids from fetal gut epitheliumas early as 8–10 PCW implies the presence of these LGR5+ tem cells (Fordham et al., 2013).

In this study, we performed single-cell transcriptional profilingof human embryonic and early fetal gut samples obtained fromnine human embryos spanning between ages 6 and 10 PCW.Additionally, we profiled mucosal biopsies from the small bowelof healthy children aged between 4 and 12 years and a group ofchildren newly diagnosed with Crohn’s disease (CD)—a com-mon form of IBD.


In total,62,854 fetal (n = 34) and 11,302 pediatric terminal ileal (n = 8)cells passed quality control and doublet exclusion criteria (Fig-ure S1;Table S1).

Approximately midway through the first trimester, the human in-testine is lined by a thick, pseudostratified epithelium that largelyfills the intestinal lumen (Figure 3A). Only 3–4 weeks later a sin-gle-cell layer starts to appear and by 10 PCW a primitive villusstructure can be observed (Figure 3A). 

The number of uniform progenitors decreased at 10 PCW (Fig-ure 3C), coinciding with villus emergence and the appearance ofLGR5+ stem cells, immature and maturing enterocytes, andgoblet and enteroendocrine cells (Figure 3C). Paneth cellswere not evident and a population ofBEST4/OTOP2+ entero-cytes was present in the first trimester of development, confirm-ing previous reports 


 Coin-ciding with epithelial remodeling, we detected the emergence ofFOXL1+ fibroblasts in small intestinal regions.

Our scRNA-seq and imaging data suggest thatFOXL1+fibroblasts start developing at the embryonic stage inthe absence of any visible villi.FOXL1+fibroblasts were alsothe main responders to HH signaling and expressed BMP andPDGFR genes during development, suggestive of their role asclustering mesenchymal cells critical for villus formation. 

n summary, we provide a detailed single-cell map of the hu-man gut during embryonic, fetal, and pediatric health as wellas during inflammatory disease and dissect transcriptionalchanges in epithelial cell dynamics during intestinal life

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104130336)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104130336)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104130336/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q104130336&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.DEVCEL.2020.11.010)  
