
Describing species: practical taxonomic procedure for biologists
================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104043701]  

## Describing Species - Judith Winston
[@doi:10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004]

### Highlights

#### Chapter 1. Introduction

The first step in wisdom is to know the things themselves; this notion consists in having the true idea of the object; objects are distinguished and known by their methodical classification and appropriate naming; therefore Classification and Naming will be the foundation of our Science. – Linnaeus

The number of known species of eukaryotic organisms is currently estimated to be about 1.4 million. It seems reasonable to suppose that most of Earth’s species have been described. But this is far from true.

Figure 1.1) New equipment and new habitats yield new species.

Small mammals are still discovered fairly often; they are mostly rodents.

Taxonomy is a subdivision of systematics, consisting of three associated activities: identification (referring a specimen to a previously classified and named group), classification (ordering organisms into groups based on perceived similarities or differences), and nomenclature (naming groups of organisms according to rules developed for the process).

A species becomes known in the scientific sense when a Latin binomial, a name consisting of two parts (a genus term and a species term), and a description are published in the scientific literature, according to the rules of botanical (The International Code of Botanical Nomenclature, ICBN) or zoological (The International Code of Zoological Nomenclature, ICZN) nomenclature. Although they are written in legal language, there is no agency to enforce these codes; there is only the consensus of biologists to observe and accept them.

New species are found and described by professional systematic biologists and paleontologists in the course of their research, as they study specimens generated by their own field work or by expeditions or surveys made by others and preserved in museum collections.

In summary, most biologists who find a new species, whether living or fossil, must describe it themselves. This book aims to explain the procedure by which scientists who find a new species in the course of their research can perform the necessary background studies and write a publishable description of that species.

I began this book at the request of some ecologist colleagues who were finding undescribed species in the course of their research and wanted to know what steps they should take to get those species named.

I anticipate grumbling from a few ofm y colleagues who seem to feel that systematics should remain an esoteric pursuit. They are convinced that if “amateurs” acquire the information they need to publish taxonomic papers, the result will be a horrendous proliferation of poorly delimited species and a great increase in confusion in the literature. However, although following established taxonomic procedure may be time-consuming and occasionally tedious, it is not especially difficult.

#### Chapter 2. Biological Nomenclature

Biologic categorization is one of the most conspicuous aspects of successful behavior, not only of man, but of all animals, in
meeting the requirements for survival in a complex environment. –Dunn and Davidson (1968:75)

We are all taxonomists. Pattern seeking and the urge to classify our environment are part of our biology.

The importance of spatial intelligence in taxonomy might explain why its mastery has often been likened to the mastery of visual arts such as painting, in which talent is often shown very early and technical mastery and creative expression continue to develop throughout life.

However, despite our common human heritage as taxonomists, most of us, whether students, scientists, or even practicing systematists, have little patience with the nomenclatural aspect of the field. 

Biologists have divided the living world into groups of organisms, or taxa, which they have arranged in a series of levels, or a taxonomic hierarchy, with the species as its essential element.

By agreement among biologists, scientific names are assigned or reassigned according to sets of rules called codes of nomenclature.

Far from being written in stone, the present rules are the result of many hard-fought scientific battles over the last 200 years. They represent the best compromise taxonomists have come up with to deal with two diametrically opposing needs: the need to name, to provide each organism with a unique and stable name; and the need to classify, to provide a system of classification that is explanatory and predictive.

Most naturalists of the time wrote in Latin, so the names they used for plants and animals were Latin. But their names were inconsistent and often paragraphs long. Authors of the time expected a name to serve as diagnosis and description, as well as identification (Mayr et al. 1953). Linnaeus is often given the credit for inventing binomial nomenclature, but his real contribution lay in standardizing and simplifying a system already in use

But if more relatives turned up, the additional names might be trinomial(e.g., Iris maritim aNorbonensis) or might expand into a whole descriptive phrase or polynomial(e.g., Iris perpusilla saxatilis Norbonensis acaulis ferme). Dealing with names a paragraph long was inconvenient.

Some taxonomists, like Linnaeus himself , developed their own rules of procedure. But none caught on widely, and well before the middle of the nineteenth century

Table 2.2 shows the features shared by the current international codes for botanical and zoological nomenclature. The primary purpose of both codes is to provide a unique binomial scientific name for every species of organism. 

Both the ICBN and the ICZN aim to 
- Ensure a unique scientific name for every taxon. These names must be Latin in form, written in the Latin alphabet, and composed in accordance with the rules of Latin grammar.
- Provide rules for publication of new names and determine whether previously published names are acceptable.
- Ensure adequate documentation and dating of names. • Ensure typification (that each name is linked to a type specimen, specimens, or species).
- By use of types permit names to be assigned to taxa without interfering with scientific freedom to make changes in classifications on the basis of new information and insights.
- Give a chronological starting point to names used (names in publications before the starting date are ignored).
- Provide an administrative system (the International Botanical Congress and its Permanent Nomenclature Committee and the IUBS and its International Commission ofZoological Nomenclature for animals) to ensure and oversee the interpretation and improvement of the codes.

The two codes are independent; the same genus name may be used for an animal and for a plant.

Some systematists find the idea of any further compromise offensive and would like to see a completely phylogenetic (cladistic) classification system replace it.


#### Chapter 3. Species and Their Discovery Chapter

There is already too much literature on the “species problem.”

A species can mean a number ofthings biologically, depending on the characteristics of the organisms involved.

It is a different phenomenon in solitary sexually reproducing animals (those most like ourselves, and perhaps for that reason, the most closely studied), than it is in sexually reproducing plants, clonal plants, and clonal or colonial invertebrates, let alone bacteria and viruses.

Numerous models have been proposed. They can be grouped under five main headings: phenetic, biological, phylogenetic, ecological, and cohesive.

The phenetic species concept is a strictly operational and non-explanatory concept based only on the observable facts of similarity and discontinuity

--> I like it

The evolutionary or phylogenetic species concept is favored by many biologists, but has the disadvantage that lineage affiliation cannot be unequivocally proven (without time travel). Another drawback is that this model deals well with speciation by branching (cladogenesis), but not as well with reticulate processes. 

Phenetic Species Concept: Species are the smallest groups that are consistently and persistently distinct and distinguishable by ordinary means.


No one of these approaches is completely right or wrong. Instead, the different concepts provide models appropriate for different purposes.

In particular, what is important is whether speciation occurs strictly by branching or cladogenesis or whether reticulation is possible.

The biological species concept is defined by reproductive isolation. Species by this definition are groups of “actually or potentially interbreeding natural populations which are reproductively isolated from other groups” (Mayr 1963:19).

About cladogenesis: life is not always neat and logical. For the majority of animals and at least a substantial minority of plants, this assumption mostly seems to be met, and phylogenetic analysis works well. But you must be aware ofits limitations and the potential impact of these other phenomena on your study organism

In organisms with closed genomes, germ cells become distinct from somatic cells early in development. In organisms with open genomes, such as plants and certain groups of invertebrates, almost any dividing cell can give rise to reproductive cells, meaning that any external genetic material that survives introduction into their cells has a chance of being passed on.

All organisms contain an array of biological information, some of which is useful in a comparative or taxonomic sense, some of which is useless, and some ofwhich may even be misleading. Quicke defines a taxonomic character as “any physical structure (macroscopic, microscopic or molecular) or behavioral system that can have more than one form (character state), the variation in which potentially provides phylogenetic information.”
Mayr defines a taxonomic character as “any attribute of a member of a taxon by which it differs or may differ from a member of a different taxon.”

New species are often collected in community studies, area surveys, and oceanographic sampling in which the primary intent of the project is to describe community diversity or the distribution and abundance of major organisms. In such cases the specimens that cannot be identified to species level are often given numbers or letters to distinguish them as separate taxa when the project results are initially written up for publication. Later they may be described formally as new species, often by collaboration with a taxonomist, and attention called to their status in previous publications.

It would be impossible to list here all the books and articles that deal with populations and species–major topics of evolutionary biology. Those listed here were selected to give different perspectives and opinions.

#### Chapter 4. Establishing Identity: The Literature Search

One reason some taxonomists strongly discourage species description by nonspecialists is that they are aware of the awful mistakes that have been made (by both amateurs and professionals) who rushed into print without stopping to make sure that what they were describing was both new and real.

It may be an individual genetic variant or mutant. It may be a variant produced by growth under unfavorable conditions (e.g., a plant subjected to heavy grazing, an animal stunted by an inadequate food supply).

Especially with plants, it may be a hybrid between two known species. It may have been described so recently that it is not in the book or article you used for identification.

It maybe a known species, but one that has never been described before from the region where you found it. Maybe it is an introduced species, or maybe it is just rare or inconspicuous and was overlooked by earlier workers.

It may indeed represent a completely new species, which must be named and described.

- Where to Find the Taxonomic Literature
- Be sure to allow enough time
- Verify your references

To finish your literature search, you must learn to read taxonomic descriptions, understand the parts of a description, and know why they are included. This topic is covered in depth in chapters 7–15, but is summarized here.

However, there is a common basic structure: a heading that consists of scientific name, name, author, and date, followed by a synonymy (a list of previous references to that species), and then the main body of the description, which may include etymology, diagnosis, taxonomic discussion, ecology, and distribution sections.

Diagnosis. This section gives a brief comparative description of the organism, pointing out how it differs from close relatives (why it is a horse of a different color).
Description. This portion contains the straightforward description of the species (2-year-old, chestnut, 14 hands, etc.). Again, style varies from group to group and publication to publication.

Distribution. In a description of a new species this may just be one locality. For a common or wide-ranging species it may be a long list of localities. If the work is regional in scope (e.g., a flora or a faunal survey) the author may list only its occurrences in the part of the world being studied.

#### Chapter 5. Establishing Identity: Using Museum Collections

Natural history collections are undoubtedly part of modern biology, and are arguably one of the most cost-effective research tools

Biologists are often confused about what taxonomists mean by the word type. Ifyour background is in biology, ecology, or paleontology, you were probably taught a species concept that was biological, in which species were recognized to be (or to have been) a population of reproducing individuals.

Ancient Greek systems of categorization, in which terms were defined on the basis of their similarity to some ideal or _type_.

Without knowledge of the workings of genetics or selection, species were perceived as immutable entities that could be defined by some perfect _type_ and all the specimens that were _typical_ belonged to that species or other category

Types in taxonomy have a very different meaning. They make the system we use for naming organisms stable and objective by tying the published name to an actual specimen or suite of specimens, serving as a reference standard for a taxon

Holotype. The holotype is a single specimen used by an author, either the only specimen he found or one of several found, but the only one designated as a type. When people talk about the type, they are referring to this single specimen.

Paratypes. Paratypes are specimens that the person making the original description examined while carrying out the work.

Topotype. These are specimens collected from the same locality as the type material (although not necessarily at the same time). Again, they have no official standing, but if a museum has such material it is usually well worth seeing. I can vouch for the fact that with marine invertebrates, topotypical material of the species you are seeking is much more likely to belong to that species than material labeled with the same name but from thousands of miles away.

#### Chapter 6. Species Descriptions in Taxonomy Chapter

Objects without names cannot well be talked about or written about; without descriptions they cannot be identified and such knowledge as may have accumulated regarding them is sealed. – Gahan (1923:73)

There are many different kinds of taxonomic publications, ranging from short notes describing a single species to multivolume monographs and treatises

#### Chapter 8. Naming Species: Etymology

Words are in themselves among the most interesting objects of study, and the names of animals and plants are worthy of more consideration than Biologists are inclined to give them. –Savory (1962:vii)

Some people approach naming their new species with trepidation, worrying about stumbling over unfamiliar or half-forgotten Latin and Greek. Others behave like expectant parents, daydreaming about potential names. Most often, the species name is an adjective or an adjective–adverb or adjective– adjective combination

One of the most useful is The Composition of Scientific Words, by Roland W. Brown (1956).A Source-Book of Biological Names and Terms by Edmund C. Jaeger (1955) is also helpful.

The codes of nomenclature give some basic rules about the formation of species names.

Descriptive names point out some characteristic or combination of characteristics of the species.

Coining a species name by combining two terms makes a more accurate description possible. When two terms are combined they become one word with no hyphenation
ex: Uvularia grandiflora

Geographic names are derived from the habitat or locality in which the organism was first found:

Each description of a new species should contain an etymology section, giving the meaning and origin of the species name.

#### Chapter 9. Type and Voucher Material Chapter

Holotypes, syntypes, lectotypes, andneotypes are the bearers of the scientific names of all animal taxa. They are the international standards of reference that provide objectivity in zoological nomenclature. They are held in trust for science by all zoologists and by persons responsible for their safe keeping. –ICZN, Art. 72(g)

The type is the name-bearer, the specimen associated with a name by description and publication. Its use provides an objective base for our system of biological nomenclature.

Save a specimen or some part of the material of each taxon collected and prepare it as a reference sample, or voucher.
The holotype is a single specimen chosen as the nomenclature type.

The type series includes all specimens on which a description of a new species is based. Syntypes are two or more specimens included in the type series. A lectotype is a single specimen selected from syntypes of a previously described species to serve as the equivalent of the holotype

Along with publication and priority, typification, the designation ofa type of a scientific name, is one of the chief principles ofthe international codes ofnomenclature (Jeffrey 1989). Both current codes for plants and animals have sections with rules concerning types. The ICBN requires that a type be indicated in order for a newplant species name to be accepted as validly published.

Once a type is selected and the description published, that type cannot be changed, even by the author, without going through a good deal of red tape.

Select a specimen that is in good condition, has been well preserved, and clearly shows as many diagnostic characters (those distinguishing it from other taxa) as possible.

Even if your description is the best that it was possible to write at the time it is published, it still might not be sufficient to distinguish your species from a new relative discovered at some future time, without restudy of your type specimen.

For protozoans, if the species can’t be recognized by a single individual,the type can consist of a number of individuals mounted in slide prepa- rations, or by a series of preparations showing different stages of the life cycle. This is called a hapantotype.

The type specimen or specimens should be deposited in a reputable scientific institution.

It is good practice to deposit voucher specimens of any organism or organisms you have studied and published research papers on into an institutional collection, even if they are not new species.

#### Chapter 10. Diagnosis

“Diagnosis”is ultimately from Greek “distinguish between things,” and “definition” from Latin definio, “enclose within limits.” The concepts are importantly different, but in fact taxonomists seldom use the terms consistently and commonly assume that they are synonymous. –Simpson (1961:138)

Whereas the number of taxonomic characters that could be mentioned in a description may indeed be limited “only by the patience of the investigator” (Mayr et al. 1953:106), a diagnosis includes just the characters that distinguish that species from others.

A differential diagnosis specifically shows the ways in which the taxon differs from other taxa that you identify by name.

In zoological taxonomy, diagnosis is sometimes called definition.

A diagnostic character is one that is useful or necessary to distinguish a species or other taxon from its relatives. They should be differences that can be quickly recognized by others.

It is important to remember that a character that is useful for diagnosis in one group may be useless for diagnosis in another, even within the genera of one family (Mayr et al. 1953). Or as botanists have put it, “The exact nature of the diagnosis is not stated in the Code, nor can it easily be specified because of the enormous diversity of organisms covered by the Code” (Kirk and Cannon 1991:281).

#### Chapter 11. Description Section

Selecting the characters necessary to give a good idea ofa species in a short description requires a thorough knowledge ofthe subject and a methodical mind.
–Bentham (1874:48)

Taxonomic characters, as you recall from chapter 3, are all the features of an taxon by which its members actually or potentially differ from those of another taxon.

Care should be taken to include the pertinent aspects of the organism’s life history. For example, for organisms with two sexes, both should be described. If differences are complex, this can be done by describing each sex differently.

Like any good description, a taxonomic description works from the familiar or more general to the specific (what Mayr called following the natural order).

If the diagnosis has been given in Latin, the description section does not have to be written in Latin, although some botanical taxonomists recommend it.


### Comments
 New equipment and new habitats yield new species.

"We do not have anything like a "species type" for cell types." 
--> Same is true for cell types!

"Species descriptions are often published in “mixed” papers, in which the new species is described in conjunction with the results of research on its physiology, morphology, reproduction, ecology, and so on."

"The other people who are likely to deal with subspecific variation are graduate students and professionals in genetics and conservation biology, who often end up studying variation within a species. They are almost the only biologists now doing “gamma” taxonomy, once considered to be the highest form of systematics."

"Synopses summarize current knowledge of morphology, ecology, terminology, and classification of a group of organisms."

"A taxonomic catalog (often spelled catalogue) usually describes the specimens or species of a group of organisms that are found in the collection of a particular museum or herbarium."

"A revision involves restudy ofa group to correct or improve its diagnosis, description, or phylogeny. As Mayr (1969) pointed out, this is one of the most important types of scientific publication for groups in which many new species are still being described."

"In botany there is another category below the level ofa revision, called a conspectus, defined by Stace (1989) as an outline ofa revision"

"Because of the historical nature of taxonomic research, taxonomic publications will be used by generations of taxonomists."


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104043701)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104043701)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104043701/P921%3BP4510)  
