
Integrated single cell analysis of human lung fibrosis resolves cellular origins of predictive protein signatures in body fluids
================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104450603]  
  
Publication date : 27 of January, 2020  

# Highlights

Here,  we leverage single cell RNA-seq and proteomic analysis of large pulmonary fibrosis patient cohorts to identify disease specific changes on the cellular level and their corresponding reflection in body fluid proteomes


hese protein signatures correlated with diagnosis, lung function, smoking and injury status. Specifically, the altered expression of a novel marker  of  lung  health,  CRTAC1,  in  alveolar  epithelium  is  robustly  reflected  in  patient  plasma. 


 41,888 single cells 


. We generated subsets of the whole lung parenchyma datasets for COL1A2+ stromal cells (Fig. 1c and Fig. S1c-e), EPCAM+ epithelial cells (Fig. 1d and Fig. S1f-h), CLDN5+ endothelial cells (Fig. 1e and Fig. S1i-k), and CD45+ leukocytes (Fig. 1f and  Fig.  S1l-n).

To  increase statistical  power  and validate our  results,  we  integrated  our  dataset with  two  large  publicly available single cell RNA-seq datasets


In summary, we generated an integrated and consistent lung cell atlas across three independent patient cohorts. Differential gene expression in lung fibrosis was robustly replicated and validated across cohorts and thus will serve as a powerful resource to investigators studying ILD pathogenesis and progression, e.g. for the dissecting of bulk RNA-seq profiles as demonstrated.

 Some  of  the  cell  state  changes  described  by  our  single  cell  analysis  may  be  reflected  in  the proteomic composition of the luminal epithelial lining fluid (ELF) of the lung

We  have  measured  BALF  proteomes  from  eight  groups  of  patients  that  were diagnosed with different forms of ILD

LDH in blood plasma is routinely measured in the clinic as a biomarker for ongoing tissue damage. Most proteins that we found increased in BALF of patients with high pLDH were also associated with lower lung function (Fig. S4a), and top outliers remained significant after accounting for patient age (Fig. S4b-e). For instance, the cartilage acidic protein 1 (CRTAC1) showed very robust negative correlation (Fig. 3e),

It is estimated that one hundred million deaths were caused by tobacco in the 20th century25. Smoking is a major  risk  factor  for  six  of  the  eight  leading  causes  of  deaths  in  the  world,  including  respiratory  and cardiovascular diseases, stroke and several malignant diseases

 A t-test between active smokers (n = 19) and never smokers (n = 36) identified 422 significantly regulated proteins (FDR<10%) (Fig. 5a), including AKR1B10 and the ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase isozyme L1 (UCHL1), both of which have been shown to be elevated in epithelium of `healthy Ì smokers28,29.

 f note, we also detected 36 significantly altered proteins (FDR<10%) in ex-smokers vs never smokers (Fig. 5c), indicating that some of the alterations induced by smoking are persisting after smoking cessation.

 --> Very low number.


 Figure  S1.    Clustering  analysis  and  cell  type  annotation  reveals  45  distinct  cell  type  identities  in  human  lung parenchyma.

 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104450603)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104450603)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104450603/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q104450603&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.21.20018358)  
