
Representing Specified Values in OWL: "value partitions" and "value sets"
=========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104601506]  

# Highlights

It is a common requirement in developing ontologies to be able to represent notions such as a "small man", a "high ranking officer" or a "health person."  There are many such "features" (also known as "qualities", "attributes", or "modifiers").

This document describes two methods to represent such features and their specified values: 1) as partitions of classes; and 2) as enumerations of individuals.  It does not discuss the use of datatypes to represent lists of values.

It should not be possible to have more than one value for any of the qualities, e.g. it should be inconsistent (unsatisfiable) to be both slender and obese or in good health and poor health.

"Partition"  - a class is partitioned by a group of subclasses if a) the subclasses are mutually exclusive, i.e. pairwise disjoint; and b) the subclasses completely cover the parent class, i.e. that the union of the subclasses is equal to the parent class.


Pattern 1: Values as sets of individuals
To say that "John is is in good health", is to say that "John has the value good_health for health_status"

There is no way to represent alternative partitionings of the same feature space. Because individuals cannot overlap, if Health_Value is defined as equivalent to enumeration of one list of distinct values, it cannot also be equivalent to a different list of distinct values. To do so would cause the reasoner to indicate a contradiction. (i.e that Health_Value was "unsatisfiable".)


To say that "John is in good health" is to say that his health is inside the Good_health_values partition of the Health_value feature. Theoretically, there is an individual health value, Johns_health, but all we know about it is that it lies someplace in the Good_health_value partition.

Representation for two variants of Pattern 2

It is not actually necessary to create the individual, Johns_health explicitly.  Instead,  it is possible to use an existential restriction to imply its existence but leave it anonymous.

There can be several alternative partitionings of the same feature space.


We would advise against mixing Pattern 1 and Pattern 2 in the same ontology

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104601506)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104601506)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104601506/P921%3BP4510)  
