
Characterization of a common progenitor pool of the epicardium and myocardium
=============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104794656]  
  
Publication date : 07 of January, 2021  

# Highlights

d. Tyser et al. used a combination of transcriptomic, imaging, and genetic lineage–labeling approaches to profile the molecular identity and precise locations of cells involved in the formation of the mouse embryonic heart. This approach allowed them to identify the earliest known progenitor of the epicardium, the outermost layer of the heart, which is an important source of signals and cells during cardiac development and injury.

here are at least two distinct groups of mesodermal cardiac progenitors, the first and second heart fields (FHF and SHF, respectively), defined broadly on the basis of marker genes expressed in different but overlapping regions of the early embryo. 
Cells from outside these heart fields can also contribute to the heart. One such structure, the proepicardium, gives rise to the epicardium, the outermost layer of cells of the vertebrate heart. The epicardium provides important paracrine signals and can also generate several cardiac cell types, including cardiomyocytes, vascular smooth muscle, and fibroblasts.

This enabled us to transcriptionally define the cardiac progenitor populations in this region, including FHF and SHF. As a user-friendly community resource, we created a web interface to investigate these data, accessible at https://marionilab.cruk.cam.ac.uk/heartAtlas/.

 This comprehensive imaging analysis revealed the discrete locations of these transcriptional clusters and highlighted the spatially ordered maturation of cardiomyocytes. It also identified a population of progenitor cells located rostral to the cardiac crescent, at the confluence of the embryonic and extraembryonic mesoderm, which we call the juxta-cardiac field (JCF).

 This study provides a detailed characterization of the transcriptional states and anatomical locations of cardiac progenitors, as well as their transition states during differentiation toward cardiomyocytes, thereby representing a valuable community resource.

 We sampled cells, using manual microdissectionto isolate the anterior cardiac region of mouseembryos, from early crescent to LHT stages andperformed single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq)

 Me4andMe6werecharacterizedbystrongexpression of cardiac progenitor markers butintermediate-to-low levels of contractile genes(Fig. 1D) and therefore represented differ-entiating cardiac progenitors

We manually micro-dissected and sequenced cells from the ventralmesoderm containing the cardiac crescent(VM), abutting dorsal mesoderm (DM), cranialmesoderm (CrM), and paraxial mesoderm(PM) (Fig. 2A). 



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104794656)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104794656)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104794656/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q104794656&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.ABB2986)  
