
Common Cell type Nomenclature for the mammalian brain: A systematic, extensible convention
==========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104247451]  

# Highlights

To facilitate cross-dataset comparison, the Allen Institute created the Common Cell type Nomenclature (CCN) for matching and tracking cell types across studies that is qualitatively similar to gene transcript management across different genome builds. 

The CCN facilitates assigning accurate yet flexible cell type names in the mammalian cortex as a step towards community-wide efforts to organize multi-source, data-driven information related to cell type taxonomies from any organism.

Cell type classification has been central to understanding biological systems for many tissues (e.g., immune system) (Lees et al., 2015) and organisms (e.g., C. elegans) (Packer et al., 2019)

This data explosion has enriched our collective understanding of biological cell types,
while simultaneously introducing challenges in cell type classification within individual studies.

Given this complex landscape, determining fundamental criteria for cell type definition in
a given study, and then establishing correspondence to a cell type defined in another study, is often nontrivial and sometimes impossible.

as new cell type classifications are continually emerging, it is unrealistic to expect complete alignment of all published datasets; but creation of standardized systems for alignment becomes even more important.

--> Maybe! A technotype framework definitely allows that.

Standardized cell type classification needs to include (1) standard nomenclature, and (2)
centralized and standardized infrastructure associated with cell type classification. Such

--> I only partially agree. Nomenclature can be substituted by IDs and infrastructure can be Wiki-like.

Any solution devised to tackle this question should ideally be effective and user-friendly and should directly address some of the ongoing challenges of ontology, data matching, and cell type naming described above in its implementation, providing some amount of immediate standardization of any cell type classifications included therein. This challenge was also addressed at A Cell Type Ontology Workshop (Seattle, June 17-18, 2019; hosted by the Allen Institute, Chan Zuckerberg Initiative (CZI) and the National Institutes of Health (NIH)), where input from representatives from the fields of ontology, taxonomy, and neuroscience made recommendations, highlighted best practices and proposed conventions for naming cell type

The problem of defining and naming cell types has many similarities to those of genes in genomics, where there is a practical need to track individual sequencing and assembly results as distinct and self-contained entities, while simultaneously recognizing the goal for a singular reference that the community can use to map sequencing data into a common context.

(1) a taxonomy, defined as the output of a computational algorithm applied to a specific dataset, which must be generated prior to implementation of this schema, and (2) a cell set, which can represent any collection of cells within a specific taxonomy (see Table 1 for definitions of key terms). These components are generated through the input of data and information generated from analysis that identifies provisional cell types (sometimes called cell types for convenience). These are analytically relevant cell sets that represent quantitatively-derived data clusters defined by whatever classification algorithm generated the taxonomy.

Each taxonomy is assigned a unique taxonomy id of the format CCN[YYYYMMDD][#], where “CCN” denotes this nomenclature convention; Y, M, and D represent year, month, and day; and # is an index for compiling multiple taxonomies on a single day.

. Cell set aliases represent descriptors intended for public use and communication, including data-driven terms, historical names, or more generic cell type nomenclature. For convenience these are split into at most one preferred alias, which represents the primary tag for public consumption (e.g., the cell type names used in a manuscript), and any other additional aliases.
Additionally, each cell set can have at most one aligned alias, which is a biologically-driven term that is selected from a controlled vocabulary

Furthermore, the CCN includes a series of metadata tags tracking the provenance and anatomy of cell sets.

User-friendly executable code for applying the CCN is available on GitHub (https://github.com/AllenInstitute/nomenclature).

Three inputs are required to run the CCN: (1) a cell type taxonomy (not necessarily
hierarchical), (2) a cell metadata file with cluster assignments (and optionally additional information), and (3) optional manual annotations of cell sets (e.g., aliases), which typically would be completed during taxonomy generation
). A final component of manual annotation is to update relevant cell sets with an aligned alias (e.g., a common usage term), which is critical for comparison of taxonomies in the CCN and will be discussed in detail below.

This results in a table of binary calls (0=no, 1=yes) indicating exclusion or inclusion of each cell in each cell set (Figure 1D), which is written to another csv file as part of the process. This format is designed to allow for probabilistic mapping of cells to cell sets, which is beyond the scope of this manuscript.

These output files are intended to be directly included as supplemental materials in manuscripts performing cell type classification in any species.

he CCN utilizes a strategy for naming cell types in the mammalian cortex that includes properties which are cell-intrinsic and potentially well-conserved between species (Table 2). This convention is used as the cell set aligned alias tag in the CCN, and ideally should directly map to cell types defined in a relevant ontology (i.e., Cell Ontology (Diehl et al., 2016) or Neuron Phenotype Ontology (Gillespie et al., 2020, 2019)).

It is applicable to taxonomies defined on any data type using any classification algorithm, including hierarchical cell type classification using scRNA-seq. While useful for these reasons alone, a primary utility of the CCN is to facilitate cross-study integration of cell type classifications, in particular when applied in the framework of a reference taxonomy.

Reference taxonomies and the CCN are two components of a multi-staged analysis
workflow for aligning cell type classifications using datasets collected across multiple labs, from multiple experimental platforms, and from multiple data modalities (Fig. 2). This workflow accommodates methodological differences in cell type definitions across studies and accommodates changes in reference taxonomies over time. The proposed workflow can be broken down into four broad stages:

-  many research teams will independently define cell types, identify their discriminating features, and name them
- an initial reference cell type classification will be defined by taking the results from one or more (ideally validated) datasets
- This reference cell type classification can now be used as a comparator for any related datasets, providing a mechanism for transferring prior knowledge about cell types across datasets

--> It is hard to filter this "prior knowledge" from "prior noise", though 

- Finally, new versions of the reference cell type classification should be periodically generated using additional data and/or computational methods.

As a whole, this workflow provides a general outline for versioned cell type classification that could be specialized as needed for communities studying different organ systems and that provides a starting point for design of future cell taxonomy and nomenclature databases.

Many cell type classification studies now use Seurat (Butler et al., 2018) for clustering and alignment because it produces believable biological results, and it is implemented in intuitive R code with extensive user guides for non-specialists.

The complexity of cell types taxonomies and their generation now requires conventions and methodology to capture and communicate essential knowledge derived from experiments. The CCN provides a schema and workflow that allows scientists to organize their cell types within a single dataset and to link taxonomies using the aligned alias and other alias terms.

Ontology curation would allow users to link data-derived cell sets to common usage terms derived from prior knowledge and connected directly with the well-annotated ontology tools that are available for many broader cell types (e.g., the Cell Ontology). In addition, aligned aliases defined in reference taxonomies could represent a starting point for expansion of existing ontologies to higher-resolution cell types defined using data-driven approaches.

Such databases can be implemented using knowledge graph based environments (Alshahrani et al., 2017; Waagmeester et al., 2020), which allow traversal up the data, information, knowledge, and wisdom (DIKW) hierarchy (Rowley, 2007). A potential output of these efforts is the “Cell Type Card”, which is a website that would compile myriad information about a specific cell set as a centralized resource. This idea has been successfully implemented for individual genes (www.genecards.org), and a prototype based on transcriptomic content was recently released as part of a study of mouse hippocampus and cortex (Yao et al., 2020b) (https://taxonomy.shinyapps.io/ctx_hip_browser/) . Planning for implementation of a more general, multimodal resource is just beginning.

This proposal is a modest step in a long and iterative process involving many
constituents. With cross-disciplinary partnership and ever-increasing data, refinement of the proposed convention will occur.


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104247451)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104247451)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104247451/P921%3BP4510)  
