
Local and Global Algorithms for Disambiguation to Wikipedia
===========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104415799]  

# Highlights

Disambiguation to Wikipedia is similar to a traditional Word Sense Disambiguation task, but distinct in that the Wikipedia link structure provides additional information about which disambiguations are compatible.

In this work we analyze approaches that utilize this information to ar- rive at coherent sets of disambiguations for a given document (which we call “global” approaches), and compare them to more tradi- tional (local) approaches.

Wikification has been shown to form a valuable component for numerous natural language processing tasks including text classifica- tion (Gabrilovich and Markovitch, 2007b; Chang et al., 2008), measuring semantic similarity between texts (Gabrilovich and Markovitch, 2007a), cross- document co-reference resolution (Finin et al., 2009; Mayfield et al., 2009), and other tasks (Kulkarni et al., 2009).

--> All important references.

For example, given the input sen- tence “I am visiting friends in <Chicago>,” we output http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chicago – the Wikipedia page for the city ofChicago, Illinois, and not (for example) the page for the 2002 film of the same name.

For example, if a mention of “Michael Jordan” refers to the computer scientist rather than the basketball player, then we would expect a mention of “Monte Carlo” in the same document to refer to the statistical technique rather than the location. Global approaches utilize the Wikipedia link graph to estimate coherence.

We present an error analysis and identify the key re- maining challenge: determining when mentions re- fer to concepts not captured in Wikipedia.

At a high level, the GLOW system optimizes the objective function in Eq. 3 in a two-stage process. We first execute a ranker to obtain the best non-null disambiguation for each mention in the document, and then execute a linker that decides whether the mention should be linked to Wikipedia, or whether instead switching the top-ranked disambiguation to null improves the objective function. As our exper- iments illustrate, the linking task is the more chal- lenging of the two by a significant margin

The first step in GLOW is to extract all mentions that can refer to Wikipedia titles, and to construct a set of disambiguation candidates for each mention.

We consider only the expressions marked as named entities by the NER tagger, the noun-phrase chunks extracted by the shallow parser, and all sub-expressions of up to 5 tokens of the noun-phrase chunks.

Given the mention m and the top-ranked disam- biguation t, the linker attempts to decide whether t is indeed the correct disambiguation ofm

We also constructed two additional data sets. The first is a subset of the ACE co-reference data set, which has the advantage that mentions and their types are given, and the co-reference is resolved. We asked annotators on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk to link the first nominal mention of each co-reference chain to Wikipedia, if possible. Finding the accu- racy of a majority vote of these annotations to be approximately 85%, we manually corrected the an- notations to obtain ground truth for our experiments.

As our error analysis illustrates, the primary remaining challenge is determining when a mention does not have a corresponding Wikipedia page.


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104415799)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104415799)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104415799/P921%3BP4510)  
