
Hydroxychloroquine Inhibits the Trained Innate Immune Response to Interferons
=============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104617060]  
  
Publication date : 10 of November, 2020  

# Highlights

Peripheral blood mononuclear cells(PBMCs) of COVID-19 patients showincreased responses to Toll-like receptorligands, suggestive of innate immunereprogramming. Rother et al. show thathydroxychloroquine inhibits theinterferon response ofCandida-trainedPBMCs from healthy donorsin vitroandblocks associated changes in lipidomeand histone modifications

By analyzing interferon responses of peripheralblood mononuclear cells from healthy donors conditioned with heat-killedCandida, trained innate immunitycan be modeledin vitro.

This is exemplified by the fact that inCOVID-19 patients, a decreased type I interferon (IFN) responseis observed, which is associated with impaired viral clearance.

Our findings provide insight into the mechanism of action of hy-droxychloroquine and indicate it decreases the trained innateimmune response, including to virus-like stimuli and IFNs.

We studied 13 patients who were admitted to Radboud Univer-sity Medical Center, a tertiary care university hospital, with aSARS-CoV-2 infection. 

Treatment with chloroquine wasstarted at the time of admission and continued for 5 days. Themedian age was 68 years (interquartile range [IQR], 54–73).

onocyteswere markedly increased in COVID-19 patients, mainly due toa striking increase in CD142+CD16(classical) monocytes (Fig-ures 1C and 1D). Interestingly, CD14+CD162+(non-classical)monocytes were hardly detectable in COVID-19 patients (Fig-ure 1D)

Of the 13 patients with COVID-19 that were included in our study,nine recovered without requiring intensive care unit (ICU) admis-sion, and four required ICU admission (n = 3) or died (n = 1) (Fig-ure S1A). At the time of presentation, we observed no clear dif-ferences in clinical variables between patients who recoveredand those who required ICU admission or died (Table S1).

Monocyte HLA-DR expression was reduced, indicating that aninflammatory monocyte phenotype was more pronounced in pa-tients who eventually required ICU admission or died (Figure 2E).CX3CR1 and CD11b expression were equal in both groups (Fig-ures 2F and 2G)

Clear differences were visible in monocyte surfacemarker expression, with decreased HLA-DR and CX3CR1expression in patients who eventually required ICU admissionor died (Figures 3E and 3F).

Lysosomes are at the center of coordinating immunometabolismand the innate immune response by mammalian target of rapa-mycin (mTOR), which is activated at the lysosomal membrane(Figure 4A).

Enhanced cytokine responses were also observedupon stimulation with the TLR2 agonist Pam3CSK4 and heat-killedCandida albicans(HKCA) (Figures S1D and S1E). Thisincreased cytokine response was unchanged in patients who re-mained hospitalized throughout our 5-day observation period(Figure S2H).

We discovered a previously unknown immunomodulatorymechanism of hydroxychloroquine, namely that it preventstrained immunity through epigenetic modulation.

Limitations of Study

We investigated the immune response in patients hospitalizedfor COVID-19. Our functional, flow cytometry, and RNAsequencing studies provide a detailed view of the innate immuneresponse in these patients. However, a limitation is that weinvestigated a small sample size of 13 patients that harbors thepotential of type II statistical error. 

--> I like limitation sessions
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104617060)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104617060)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104617060/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q104617060&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.XCRM.2020.100146)  
