
The distribution of cellular turnover in the human body
=======================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104873201]  

# Highlights

We integrated ubiquity, mass and lifespan of all major cell
types to achieve a comprehensive quantitative description
of cellular turnover. We found a total cellular mass turnover
of 80 ± 20 grams per day, dominated by blood cells and gut
epithelial cells. In terms of cell numbers, close to 90% of the
(0.33 ± 0.02) × 1012 cells per day turnover was blood cells.


 The most recent rigorous census1–3
 has estimated the number of cells in the adult body to be approximately
30±0.5×1012, of which about 90% are from the hematopoietic lineage, mostly red blood cells (RBCs)2,3
. Yet beyond this static view, there is no corresponding overall census of the dynamics of death
and regeneration of cells and tissues


The lifespan of a cell varies greatly across cell type and tissue,from 3–5d for gut epithelia, to years (and even a lifetime) for cardiomyocytes or neurons. We define the daily cellular turnover rate
as the average daily number of cell deaths in a specific cell population. We note that continuous recycling of intracellular components, important for cellular maintenance and accounting for a large fraction of the overall energetic flux of the body, does not lead to celldeath and is thus not a case of cellular turnover.

The main cell types that our analysis focused on are those comprising at least 0.1% of the 30 trillion cells comprising the human body3
 or ones with an especially fast turnover of τ<10d. 

--> Nice, there we have an explicit definition of "major cell types"


Figure 1a presents for each of these cell types, the number of cells and their mean lifespan (Methods

For some cell types, we could not locate reliable turnover rates
in humans in the literature. We were still able to derive an upper
bound based on lifespan estimates from rodents, described in detail
in Supplementary Table 2, as the lifespan in humans, in general,
exceeds that in rodents

However, not all parts of the human body are ever replaced
(for example, most brain neurons and cells of the eye lens, which we
calculate to constitute altogether ≈0.5% of the cells in the human
body15,16) and hence complete turnover never happens

Our analysis also offers an additional aspect to the classic analogy in the metaphysics of identity25 of the human body as being
akin to the ship of Theseus, where all the components are replaced
while the identity is paradoxically retained. As shown here, we can
now quantitatively dissect what fraction is replaced and on what
timescale. Most broadly, the analysis presented here grounds our
understanding of and contextualizes questions about the cellular
dynamics of the human body in rigorous quantitative terms.



# Comments

Lifespan might be added to Wikidata via https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Property:P2250.

Beautiful figures. 

## Tags

1.4.4

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104873201)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104873201)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104873201/P921%3BP4510)  
