
Structural Scaffolds for Citation Intent Classification in Scientific Publications
==================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104450390]  

# Highlights

Identifying the intent of a citation in sci- entific papers (e.g., background information, use of methods, comparing results) is criti- cal for machine reading of individual publi- cations and automated analysis of the scien- tific literature.

we introduce a new dataset of citation intents (Sci- Cite) which is more than five times larger and covers multiple scientific domains compared with existing datasets. Our code and data are available at: https://github.com/ allenai/scicite.
1
we propose two auxiliary tasks as struc- tural scaffolds to improve citation intent prediction:1 (1) predicting the section title in which the citation occurs and (2) predicting whether a sen- tence needs a citation.

On two datasets, we show that the pro- posed neural scaffold model outperforms existing methods by large margins.

we achieve a new state-of-the-art of 67.9% F1 on the ACL- ARC citations benchmark, an absolute 13.3% in- crease over the previous state-of-the-art.

Multitask learning as defined by Caruana (1997) is an approach to in- ductive transfer learning that improves generaliza- tion by using the domain information contained in the training signals of related tasks as an induc- tive bias. It requires the model to have at least some sharable parameters between the tasks.

To this end, using citation markers such as “[12]” or “Lee et al (2010)”, we identify sentences in a paper that include citations and the neg- ative samples are sentences without citation mark- ers. The goal of the model for this task is to predict whether a particular sentence needs a citation.

While there has been a long history of studying citation intents, there are only a few existing publicly available datasets.

We implement our proposed scaffold framework using the AllenNLP library (Gardner et al., 2018).

An interesting line of future work is to explore the design of such tasks or explore the properties or similarities between the auxiliary and the main tasks. Another relevant line of work is adapting our model to other domains containing documents with similar linked structured such as Wikipedia articles.


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104450390)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104450390)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104450390/P921%3BP4510)  
