
Molecular biology gets wikified
===============================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104161380]  

# Highlights

Earlier this week, bioinformatics experts announced the creation of a Wikipedia-style database that allows anyone to create and amend a repository of complex biochemical pathways. The database, called WikiPathways, joins WikiGene, Protein Data Bank Wiki, and WikiProteins, not to mention a host of other wikis used by individual labs and smaller communities of researchers.

"Right now, it’s the large sequencing centres that are distributing the information,” says Andrew Su, a bioinformaticist at the Genomics Institute of the Novartis Foundation in San Diego, California. “The scientist working on their one protein at the bench doesn’t have a way to participate in that process.”

On 28 May, researchers unveiled a protein annotation database called WikiProteins2. The database, spearheaded by Barend Mons at the Erasmus Medical Centre in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, stops short of becoming a chaotic wiki free-for-all by requiring that data be entered into specific categories, such as protein function, and by noting those who participate in the editing.

This structured approach makes the data easier to mine, but some argue that the structure can limit participation. “The more structure you add, it can become an activation barrier to having people contribute content,” says Su.

Instead, Su and his collaborators have taken a much more grass-roots approach. They simply created Wikipedia pages corresponding to individual human genes – about 7,500 in all – and modified the format of the 650 gene pages which already existed, before inviting researchers to annotate each gene with information about its function and the role of the protein it encodes.

In 2006, Kai Wang, then a bioinformatics graduate student at the University of Washington in Seattle, wrote a letter to Nature 5 urging the community to create wiki-based gene annotation tools. Now a postdoc at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia in Pennsylvania, Wang says he has not yet contributed to any of the new wikis. “There are too many of them to invest a lot of time to test drive every single one of them.

“WikiPathways would live on if I got hit by a truck tomorrow,” he says. “Or if our entire team were to decide to go work for Google.

# Comments
I'd very much love to see a Wiki Cell Types initiative.


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104161380)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104161380)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104161380/P921%3BP4510)  
