
HeLa, a new microbial species
=============================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104591553]  

# Highlights

Consistent application of our criteria for species seems to require that HeLa cells, a vigorous clone of human origin, be regarded as a separate species. We propose new taxa for it to the level of family. This species has been unusually successful in its niche, but the existence of other, less extreme, examples raises several problems which await resolution. Our concepts should incorporate the diversity of real phenomena.

HeLa cells turned out to be remarkably successful in the tissue-
culture niche. Within a few years they had invaded and outcompeted many other cell lines, worldwide, without this having been recognized at all. Their dispersal from one culture to another occurs by means which would have delighted Darwin, who fretted over dispersal of nonflying organisms to distant islands and the like.

We call them a new species for four reasons. First, their genotype is very different, far outside the range of those of viable humans. Second, they occupy an ecological niche extremely different from that of humans. Third, they persist and expand well beyond the desires of the human cultivators of cells; they are the weeds of cell culture. Of course they can't interbreed with humans, but we don't emphasize this criterion in that way because individual cells of diverse vertebrates can hybridize with some cancer cells (e.g., Klinger et al., 1978); hybridomas are the result and have some fame in biotechnology. HeLa cells have been claimed to have hybridized with some other cell lines while taking them over (Lavappa, Macy, and Shannon, 1976), but there is evidence against this (Nelson-Rees et al., 1980). It is neverheless relevant that HeLa cells don't exchange genes with real humans.

The expected persistence of its habitat is never used as a criterion for judging the reality of a species, but rather for judging its susceptibility to extinction.

The speciation even occurred as a result of deliberate human action. We recognize, though, that other species have originated by even more deliberate human action, namely hybridization to produce polyploids, some of which have even re- originated species pre-existing in nature.

HeLa cells now have an evolution quite independent of that of Homo sapiens, except for their niche dependence, which is an entirely different matter.

They are unconventional, as a species, but so were, e.g., sib species once. The problem is with our perceptions, not with the phenomena. Regarding HeLa cells as a separate species opens several cans of
worms.

Most concepts and entities in the real world have fuzzy
boundaries. Sometimes even approximate boundaries can be made only by convention. We mean here to raise what seem to us to be real problems. We propose a solution to one, where the phenomenon is well defined; other solutions may be better in other cases or even in this one. Dogma hides choices. Moreover, pigeonholing is a form of stereotypy. We should try not to force real phenomena into predefined categories, but rather let our categories evolve with our knowledge.



# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104591553)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104591553)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104591553/P921%3BP4510)  
