
Deep generative model embedding of single-cell RNA-Seq profiles on hyperspheres and hyperbolic spaces
=====================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104450629]  
  
Publication date : 25 of November, 2019  

# Highlights

Here, we introduced scPhere, a scalable deep generative model to embed cells into low-dimensional hyperspherical or hyperbolic spaces, as a more accurate representation of the data.

However, standard variational  auto-encoders  have  several  shortcomings whenmodeling  and analyzing scRNA-seq data. First, they assume a standard multi-dimensional normal prior for the low-dimensional  latent  variables. Unfortunately,  this prior  encourages  the  low-dimensional representations of all cells to group in the centerof the latent space, even for data consisting of distinct  cell  types,  especially  if  the  model is  trained long  enough,such  that  the  posterior distributions gradually approximate the prior distribution. 

We developed scPhere(pronounced “sphere”),a deep learning method that takes scRNA-seq count data and  information  about  multiple  known  confounding  factors  (e.g.,  batch,  condition)  and embeds the cells to a hyperspherical or hyperbolic latent space


By  comparison,  both t-stochastic  neighborhood  embedding  (t-SNE)(Maaten  and  Hinton,  2008)and uniform  manifold  approximation  and  projection(UMAP)(McInnes et al., 2018)put CD14+monocytes at the origin (Fig.1E,F), and the 10erythroid cellswere embedded so close to each otherthat theyalmost collapsed toa single point.

Figure 2.scPhereaddresses the cell crowding problem by using a sphericallatent space.scPhere embeddings on the surface of unit spheres (A-C) 

--> Man it would super cool to plot it in a NASA sphere like that at IO-USP

When cellsare expected  to  show developmentaltrajectories,  such  asfrom  adult  stem  cells  to differentiated cells, scPhere can embed them into a hyperbolic space of the Lorentz model(Nagano et al., 2019; Nickel and Kiela, 2018), and optionally convert the coordinates in the Lorentz model to the Poincaré disk for visualization(Mathieu et al., 2019; Nickel and Kiela, 2017).


9).  Given  the  rapid  development  of  spatial transcriptomics(Rodriques et al., 2019; Vickovic et al., 2019), single-cell ATAC-seq(Lareau et al., 2019; Satpathy et al., 2019)and other complementary measurements, scPhere can be extended for integrative  analysis  of  multi-modality  data.  We  can  also  learn  discrete  hierarchical  trees  for better interpreting developmental trajectories. Given the large number of cells to be sequenced by large international initiatives such as the Human Cell Atlas(Regev et al., 2017), we foreseen that scPhere willbe a valuable tool for large-scale single-cell genomicsstudies



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104450629)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104450629)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104450629/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q104450629&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/853457)  
