
Longitudinal Multi-omics Analyses Identify Responses of Megakaryocytes, Erythroid Cells, and Plasmablasts as Hallmarks of Severe COVID-19
=========================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104139713]  
  
Publication date : 26 of November, 2020  

# Highlights

We analyzed the bulk transcriptome, bulkDNA methylome, and single-cell transcriptome (>358,000 cells, including BCR profiles) of peripheral bloodsamples harvested from up to 5 time points

The studydemonstrates broad cellular effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection beyond adaptive immune cells and provides anentry point toward developing biomarkers and targeted treatments of patients with COVID-19.

eripheral blood of patients withsevere COVID-19 exhibits high frequencies of interleukin-6(IL-6)-secreting  CD14hiCD16himonocytes  as  well  as  adecrease of non-classical (CD14loCD16hi) monocytes (Hadjadjet al., 2020;Schulte-Schrepping et al., 2020).

Prominently,  MK  proportionswere elevated throughout the course ofthe disease (Figure 2F). To define poten-tial cell populations, which might bedirectly infected by SARS-CoV-2, we specifically interrogatedACE2mRNA amounts in the dataset, which were below detec-tion limit (<7 reads) in all cell populations (data not shown).


A hypergeometric test of allactive TFs against the REACTOME database showed an enrich-ment of ‘‘cell differentiation pathway’’ (q = 0.03) and ‘‘MK devel-opment and platelet production’’ (q = 0.05).

--> Nice! q values!

We could distinguish a smaller cluster of PBs, whichexpressed genes associated with neutrophils (e.g.,ELANE,MPO, andCAMP)(Figure 5E). Unlike in the previous study(Wilk et al., 2020), we also found such cells in healthy subjects,albeit at lower frequency (Figure 5C)

--> Difference in ethnicity of samples?

Elevated Megakaryocyte Amounts as a Feature of theSystemic Inflammatory Response to COVID-19Systemic inflammatory responses are known to consume plate-lets

Of note, we found that the COVID-19 PBs werepredicted to be highly metabolically active in a systems biologymodeling approach (Joshi et al., 2020). The observed changessuggest a role of PBs as a nutrient sink, which was alreadyobserved in extrafollicular PBs as a hallmark of a systemic in-flammatory response in severe malaria (Vijay et al., 2020).

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104139713)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104139713)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104139713/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q104139713&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IMMUNI.2020.11.017)  
