

Ontologies for the life sciences
================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q105870680]  
  
Publication date : 15 of November, 2005  

# Highlights

Even terms for important high-level concepts and relations that are fundamental to life sciences are often used inconflicting or ambiguous ways (Smith and Rosse, 2004).One prominent example is the conceptgene. For GDB (Fasmanet al., 1996),a gene is a “DNA fragment that can be transcribed and translated into a protein”.For GenBank (Bensonet al., 1997) and GSDB (Keenet al., 1996), a gene is a“DNA region of biological interest with a name and that carries a genetic traitor phenotype”. The latter definition is problematic, not only because it makes theanswer to the question of which genes exist depend on the vagaries of humannaming acts but also because it comprehends nonstructural coding DNA regionssuch as intron, promoter, and enhancer.

-->  2.1. The concept of "gene"

Ontologies can,however, support parsing and disambiguating sentences by enforcing grammaticallycompatible uses of terms via rules for ontologically compatible combinations ofreferents (Jackson and Ceusters, 2002; Nirenburg and Raskin, 2001).

Ontology as a branch of philosophy can be important in bringing clarity to thelife science field even before we enter the specific territory of biological domainontologies. Thus, consider the fact that “DNA” can be used to designate quitedifferent entities.


mong domain ontologies, we can draw distinctions between ontologies ofvarying scope and content. Thus, we can distinguish between•upper-level ontologies, which are primarily concerned with the small number ofgeneral categories (such ascell,orgene,ormolecule) that serve as the basis ofour understanding of a particular domain;•terminology-based ontologies, which are centered around the many highlyspecific terms used in the formulation of the results of scientific inquiry (suchasenzyme active site formation, postsynaptic membrane,orreceptor signalingprotein activity).

2.1.    Upper-level ontologiesThe first important ontologist was Aristotle (384–322 BC) who, among many otherthings, pursued the question of how reality is organized into classes or universals.His solution is presented in hisCategories, which can be seen as the first upper-level ontology (Barnes, 1984). From Aristotle’s point of view, 10 categories sufficeto express anything that can be known about something:•Substance•Quantity•Quality•Relation•Place•Time•Situation•Condition•Action•Affection.

--> Super cool!  1.2.1. Descriptional logic and its historical context

A contemporary philosophically motivated upper-level ontology for MolecularBiology (MBO) is advanced in Schulze-Kremer (1997). Like DOLCE, this startsfrom a single node, and it also extends to incorporate those physical and abstractentities that are relevant for biology and bioinformatics.


e upper level of the Molecular Biology Ontology (MBO) is shown in Figure 3.Starting from the root nodeBeing,which includes all entities of any sort, it dis-tinguishes two disjoint classes ofObjectandEvent,


AnObjectretains its identity fromone moment to the next; anEvent,in contrast, is divided into temporal parts orphases and unfolds itself through these phases in successive moments of time. Thisdistinction is passed on to all subclasses ofObjectandEven


Physical Eventissubclassified on the basis of whether it is initiated by human intention intoHumanActivityandNatural Process. The operations of man-made devices in laboratoryexperimentation fall under the first of these two headings, the natural processessubject to molecular biological analysis under the second.Another closely related more general purpose ontology is the Basic FormalOntology (BFO) (Grenonet al., 2003; Grenon and Smith, 2004), which draws a stillmore radical distinction than that betweenObjectsandEventsby distinguishingtwo separate ontologies, called SNAP, for enduring entities (such as organisms,cells, enduring attributes, functions, anddispositions) and SPAN, for processes orevents (Figure 4).

--> cool stuff


   What is an ontology?Three conceptions of domain ontologies can be distinguished:
  1. A concise and unambiguous description of principal relevant entities with theirpotential, valid relations to each other (Schulze-Kremer, 1998).
 2. A system of categories accounting for a particular vision of the world (Guarino,1998).
 3. A specification of a conceptualization (Gruber, 1993).
   
  (1) and (2) represent a view of ontology broadly in the spirit of Aristotle’sontology and of traditional philosophical ontology, and realized in the top-levelcategory systems illustrated above. (3) rests on a view of ontologies rooted inlogic-based knowledge representation; it tells us that to build an ontology we mustanalyze our domain of interest and represent the basic concepts that are exemplifiedtherein in some formal language

ome further requirements that a domain ontologyshould satisfy.1. Each term in an ontology should be defined as precisely as possible

--> Hmm that is important for 2.4.4. A pragmatic definition of cell type, and also 1.2. Formal representation of knowledge

. An ontology should be associated with documentation specifying its expressivecapabilities, as well as its scope and the levels of granularity of the entities withwhich it deals.

--> That is missing for CL


The building blocks of an ontology are as follows:
1.Te r m s
2.Links between terms, for instance, the link between “mammal” and “animal”,representing the fact that the class designated by the former term is included assubclass within the class designated by the latter.
3.Predicates
4.Propositionsa

6.Definitions, which can be divided into real, nominal, and ostensive. Realdefinitions capture the essence or nature of the entities referred to by the termto be defined: they specify the universal marks, which all instances of a definedcategory share (Michaelet al., 2001). Nominal definitions reflect the way agiven term is used. They may be analytic, which means that they decompose theconcept to be defined into its necessary and sufficient conditions (e.g., bacheloris an unmarried man). Or they may be stipulative, which means that they serve tointroduce a new concept (e.g., an alpha-helix peptide is a polypeptide moleculewith the following geometry..., nonlytic viral exocytosis is the exit of thevirion particle from the host cell by exocytosis, without causing cell lysis).Ostensive definitions define concepts by pointing to or by enumerating examples,as when we define “yellow” by pointing to yellow things.

--> 1.2.5. The role of definitions in formal knowledge

An ontology isnot a database schema, that is, it does not describe the categories,data types, and organization in a database. Rather, it is a specification of the classes and relations among entities in the real world.

-> nice statement
n ontology isnot a taxonomythat knows only about superclass and subclassrelations; an ontology is open to other types of fundamental relations, includingtemporal, mereological (part-whole), topological, compositional, and casual rela-tions, as well as dependence relations, for example, between qualities and functionsand the objects which they are the qualities and function


In order to assemble the components described above (terms, propositions,axioms, formalism, subclass relations, etc.), we apply the following steps in suc-cession

- Collect an initial list of domain-relevant terms.

- Provide a unique and explicit definition for each high-level term.


Experts often have only a tacitunderstanding of the technical terms they use; thus, it is often difficult to providean explicit formal definition, not least given the ambiguities by which many termsare affected. Ontology management software should therefore be capable ofdisambiguating terms with multiple meanings, for example, by imposing uniqueidentifiers.

Data annotation is the process of linking data records, for example, in a geneproduct database to other knowledge resources, for example pertaining to cellularlocations, in a process comparable to the process of indexing or cataloging booksor other literature items. It is not a full-fledged ontology as described above thatis required for this purpose, but rather only a controlled vocabulary, whose mainpurpose is to provide a fixed and unambiguous terminology for communicationof research results. A controlled vocabulary of this sort is developed in the GeneOntology (GO) project


he GO approach has brought considerable benefits:
1. Work on populating GO could start immediately, without its authors needing tosolve some of the intricate problems that face ontologies formalized as logicaltheories.
2. Extending GO does not require the completion of complex protocols of formallydetermined steps but can be done intuitively by the expert biologist.
3. There are few formal constraints standing in the way of easy incorporation ofexisting biological terms into the GO vocabulary.
4. The principle of unique identifiers allows GO terms to be used for databaseannotation without the consideration of their place in the GO hierarchy.


Focusing on the rapid population of GO has, however, a number of drawbacks(Smithet al., 2004):
1. It is unclear what kinds of reasoning are permissible on the basis of GO’shierarchies.
2.  The rationale of GO’s subclassifications is unclear. The reasoning that wentinto current choices has not been preserved and thus cannot be explained to orreexamined by a third party.
3.  No procedures are offered by which GO can be validated.
4.  There are insufficient rules for determining how to recognize whether a givenconcept is or is not present in GO. The use of a mere string search presupposesthat all concepts already have a single standardized representation, which is notthe case

--> Same drawbacks for 1.3.3. Wikidata as a platform for representation of biological knowledge



# Comments

## Tags


1.3. Knowledge Representation in biology

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q105870680)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q105870680)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105870680/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q105870680&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
