
Bioinformatics Data Skills
==========================
  
  [@wikidata:Q105756183]  
  

# Highlights

## Chapter 2 

The  actual  process  is  quite  simple:  laying  out  a  project  only entails  creating  a  few  directories  with  mkdir  and  empty  README  files  with  touch(commands we’ll see in more depth later). But this simple initial planning pays off inthe long term.

In these cases, it’s important to always use relative paths (e.g., ../data/stats/qual.txt). Using absolute paths leaves your work less portable between collaborators and decreases reproducibility.

- Document your methods and workflows

This should include full command lines (copied and pasted) that are run throughthe  shell  that  generate  data  or  intermediate  results.

--> I never do that, shame on me

- Document the origin of all data in your project directory

You need to keep track of where data was downloaded from, who gave it to you,and  any  other  relevant  information. It’s  important  to  include  when  the  data  was  downloaded.

- Document the versions of the software that you ran

All of this information is best stored in plain-text README files. 
Where  should  you  keep  your  README  files?  A  good  approach  is  to  keep  READMEfiles in each of your project’s main directories.

Ultimately,  you’ll  arrive  at  your  own  project  organization  system  thatworks for you; the take-home point is: leverage directories to help stay organized.

### Shell Expansion Tips

 If you’ve ever typed cd ~ togo  to  your  home  directory,  you’ve  used  shell  expansion—it’s  yourshell  that  expands  the  tilde  character  (~)

 $ mkdir -p zmays-snps/{data/seqs,scripts,analysis}

 it’s best to be as restrictive as possible when using wildcards. Instead of zmaysB*,use zmaysB*fastq or zmaysB_R?.fastq (the ? only matches a single character).

 Another useful trick is to use leading zeros (e.g., file-0021.txt ratherthan  file-21.txt)  when  naming  files.

--> Malandragem

### Markdown for Project Notebooks

Plain text is alsoa   future-proof  format:  plain-text  files  written  in  the  1960s  are  still  readable  today,whereas files from word processors only 10 years old can be difficult or impossible toopen  and  edit. 

Pandoc can convert between a variety of different markup and output formats. UsingPandoc  is  very  simple—to  convert  from  Markdown  to  HTML,  use  the  --from markdown and --to html options and supply your input file as the last argument:$ pandoc --from markdown --to html notebook.md > output.html


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q105756183)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q105756183)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105756183/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q105756183&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105756183/P921%3BP4510)  
