
A logical model of homology for comparative biology
===================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q105099178]  
  
Publication date : 26 of March, 2019  

# Highlights

Homology is a key concept in comparative anatomy; two important types are historical homology (the similarity of organisms due to common ancestry) and serial homology (the similarity of repeated structures within an organism).

Using seven competency questions, we evaluated the reasoning ramifications of two logical models: the Reciprocal Existential Axioms (REA) homology model and the Ancestral Value Axioms (AVA) homology model. 

 The complexity of anatomical data, however, has been an impediment to standardization and computation, and many of the critical tasks rely on manual inspection of the data and human judgment

 Our motivation for undertaking this work, and the context in which we test different formalisms, is the Phenoscape project (phenoscape.org), in which we have been working to demonstrate the value of a semantic approach through the development of multispecies anatomy ontologies (Dahdul et al. 2010, 2012; Mungall et al. 2012; Haendel et al. 2014) and other required resources including taxonomy ontologies (Midford et al. 2013), annotation tools (Balhoff et al. 2010, 2014), and a knowledgebase to hold these structured data (Mabee et al. 2018). 

 ? Having explicit logic that mirrors biologists’ expectations but that can also be employed computationally would enable computationally assisted discoveries in comparative biology that are limited only by the scale of available semantically described biodiversity data.

 Another proposed approach was to represent hypotheses for the homology of anatomical entities outside of formalized ontologies; the ontology itself could remain homology-neutral (Mabee et al. 2007a; also see Vogt 2008, 2018a; Vogt et al. 2009; Dahdul et al. 2010, 2012

 The Bgee initiative (bgee.org) led computational work to use homology relations to align anatomical entities between species-specific anatomy ontologies to enable comparisons of gene expression patterns between species (Bastian et al. 2008; Parmentier et al. 2010; Roux et al. 2015). 

Table 1.Comparison of the REA and the AVA homology model
 Homology relation semantics 	All-some 	All-all 	In AVA, structures are homologous to all subtypes of asserted homologs. 
 --> Very interesting table

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q105099178)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q105099178)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q105099178&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/588822)  
