
Evolution of cellular diversity in primary motor cortex of human, marmoset monkey, and mouse
============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q105870478]  
  
Publication date : 01 of April, 2020  

# Highlights

 Using high-throughput transcriptomic and epigenomic profiling of over 450,000 single 26nuclei in human, marmoset monkey, and mouse, we demonstrate a broadly conserved cellular makeup 27of this region, whose similarity mirrors evolutionary distance and is consistent between the 28transcriptome and epigenome.

 This consensus transcriptomic 35classification allowed the Patch-seq identification of layer 5 (L5) corticospinal Betz cells in non-human 36primate and human and characterization of their highly specialized physiology and anatom

 --> Archetypes


 M1 is essential for fine motor control and is functionally conserved across 62placental mammals. M1is an agranular cortex, lacking a defined L4, although neurons with L4-like 63properties have been described 14. L5 of carnivore and primate M1 contains exceptionally large 64“giganto-cellular” corticospinal neurons (Betz cells in primates 15,16that contribute to the pyramidal tract 65and are highly specialized for their unusually large size with distinctive “taproot”-style dendrites 17,18. 66Extracellular recordings from macaque corticospinal neurons reveal distinctive action potential 67properties supportive of a high conduction velocity and similar, unique properties have been reported 68during intracellular recordings from giganto-cellular neurons in cats19–21. Additionally, some primate Betz 69cells directly synapse onto alpha motor neurons, whereas in cats and rodents these neurons synapse 70instead onto spinal interneurons 22,23. These observations suggest that Betz cells possess specialized 71intrinsic mechanisms to support rapid communication, some of which are primate specific.

 --> Interesting layers of knowledge: species-specific, but also specificity for higher taxons, like primates
 
 We made all primary and analyzed data publicly available. Raw sequence data are available for 93download from the Neuroscience Multi-omics Archive (nemoarchive.org) and the Brain Cell Data 94Center (biccn.org/data)


 A semantic representation of the cell types defined through these studies is available in the provisional Cell Ontology (https://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/PCL; Supplementary Table 1).

 --> Nice! It is a shame that the rules of reuse are obscure

 or each species, a diverse set of neuronal and non-neuronal cell type clusters were defined based on 123unsupervised clustering of snRNA-seq datasets (cluster metadata in Supplementary Table 2

 Post-clustering, cell types were organized into taxonomies based on transcriptomic similarities and 137given a standardized nomenclature (Supplementary Table 3).


 As described previously for a different 138cortical region 2, taxonomies were broadly conserved across species and reflected different 139developmental origins of major non-neuronal and neuronal classes (e.g. GABAergic neurons from 140ganglioniceminences (GEs) versus glutamatergic neurons from the cortical plate) and subclasses (e.g. 141GABAergic CGE-derived Lamp5/Sncgand Vipversus MGE-derived Pvalband Sst),

 --> Multi-species genes

  Three astrocyte subtypes had frequencies and layer distributions that 158correlated with known morphologically-defined astrocyte types 25, including a common typein all layers 159(protoplasmic), arare type in L1 (interlaminar) 26, and a rare type in L6 (fibrous).

Consistent with previouslyreported differences in GABAergic neuron frequencies in primate versus 165rodent somato-motor cortex based on histological measurements(reviewed in 28), we found twice as 166many GABAergic neurons in human(33%) compared to mouse M1 (16%) an intermediate proportion 167(23%) in marmoset (Fig. 1f). Despite these differences, the relative proportions of GABAergic neuron 168subclasses were similar

--> Many cell types, cool


We previously reported two transcriptomic 270clusters in human MTG that corresponded to protoplasmic astrocytes and ILAs 2, and we validated 271these types in M1 (Extended Data Fig. 4g,h). We identified a third type, Astro L1-6 FGFR3 AQP1, that 272expresses APQ4and TNCand corresponds to fibrous astrocytes in WM (Extended Data Fig.4g, left273ISH). A putative varicose projection astrocyte did not express human astrocyte markers (Extended Data 274Fig. 4g, middle and right ISH), and this rare type may not have been sampled or is not 275transcriptomically distinc

we clustered nuclei (Methods) to group cell populations into 31 cell types in human, 36 cell types 368in marmoset, and 42 cell types in mouse

--> Confusion clusters and types.

Chandelier cells share a core molecular identity across species

--> 2.4.4.2.1 The cell archetype and also 2.1.2. Species-specific genes and multispecies genes. 

# Comments
Very large study, multiple cell types. A lot to parse. 


## Tags
1.4.2. A focus on single-cell RNA sequencing
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q105870478)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q105870478)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105870478/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q105870478&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105870478/P921%3BP4510)  
