
Building a high-quality Human Cell Atlas
========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q105080655]  
  
Publication date : 26 of January, 2021  

# Highlights

Here, the HCA Standards and Technology
Working Group outlines pertinent technical
challenges and their approach to defining
benchmarks and quality control measures
to ensure high-quality data for building a
comprehensive and accurate human cell
atlas and help guide other atlas projects in
health and disease

The HCA community is open and collaborative, sharing its data
through an open-source data coordination
platform (DCP; https://www.humancellatlas.
org/data-coordination/) and bringing
together and aligning biological, clinical,
computational and engineering experts
from diverse fields.


To fulfill this mission, the HCA
established a Standards and Technology
Working Group (STWG) not only to guide
and advise its members around technology
choices but also to outline best practices
and help coordinate and carry out scientific
work to support this mission.

The measurements underlying an atlas
span diverse molecular aspects of cells
and tissues, including the transcriptome,
genome, epigenome, proteome and
metabolome, as well as structural features
of cells, tissues and organs

Third, the rapid development of new methods
by a highly engaged community requires
strategies to adopt and disseminate new
methods throughout the HCA. Finally, as
is now increasingly appreciated, human
tissues and organs vary widely, as do sample
types (biopsy, resection and autopsy), such
that a method’s performance may vary
substantially depending on the tissue or
organ to which it is applied

because tissue-processing protocols vary
in cell recovery11 and it is not clear which,
if any, provide the full ground truth of
cellular composition, generating datasets
with varying experimental designs and
technologies can increase the completeness
of the first atlas draft

Considering the diversity
of tissues and questions, we argue that
benchmarking experiments should aim to
produce decision trees that serve to guide
researchers to choose a protocol best suited
to their samples and questions (Fig. 2).

--> This is a good suggestion! 

The HCA’s STWG and Analysis
Working Group will facilitate this process
by developing broadly agreed-upon
experimental and computational metrics
and guidelines for these comparisons. The
STWG will also receive feedback from the
HCA Biological Networks on the application
of these guidelines to specific organs,
tissues and systems. Below, we outline the
considerations for the construction of robust
and useful SOPs and benchmarking datasets
for each stage of the process, including
sample collection, sample processing, sample
profiling and data analysis


Cell dissociation depends on the cell type and
extracellular matrix composition of each
tissue, and its process directly impacts the
atlas


SOPs describing each pipeline from tissue
type to data type will be summarized in a
STWG virtual handbook linked to detailed
open access workflows in protocols.io.
Finally, organizational SOPs help address
sample tracking systems and necessary
equipment, setting labs up for success.


 particular, peripheral
blood monocytes (PBMCs)10, which are
commercially available in large batches and
are stably frozen in aliquots, can be easily
shared across labs.

Extensive metadata recording. Adding
metadata on clinical, epidemiological,
collection, histological and technical features
allows the identification of potential factors
driving batch effects and helps to correct
or minimize variations in data. Metadata
collection is performed for all HCA datasets
in the DCP (https://data.humancellatlas.org/
metadata).
# Comments

## Tags

1.4. The challenges of the Human Cell Atlas
1.4.3. Data availability
  1.4.3.1. As coordinated by the Human Cell Atlas
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q105080655)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q105080655)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105080655/P921%3BP4510)  
