
A protocol for adding knowledge to Wikidata: aligning resources on human coronaviruses
======================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q105037759]  
  
Publication date : 22 of January, 2021  

# Highlights

Wikidata, a public knowledge graph aligned with Wikipedia, is such a commons and uses unique
identifiers to link knowledge in other knowledge bases. However, Wikidata may not always have the right schema
for the urgent questions. In this paper, we address this problem by showing how a data schema required for the
integration can be modeled with entity schemas represented by Shape Expressions.

Rapid evaluation of these new research findings and integration with
existing resources requires frictionless access to the
underlying research data upon which the findings are
based. This requires interoperable data and sophisticated
integration of these resources. Part of this integration is
reconciliation, which is the process where matching concepts in Wikidata are sought [10]. Is a particular gene or
protein already described in Wikidata? Using a shared
interoperability layer, like Wikidata, different resources
can be more easily linked.

The Gene Wiki project has been leveraging Wikidata
to link different research silos by creating a brokerage
system between resources on genetics, biological processes, related diseases, and associated drugs 

This paper is a case report of a workflow/protocol
for data integration and publication. The first step in
this approach is to develop the data schema. Wikidata has a schema extension called EntitySchema
that uses Shape Expressions (ShEx) as the structural
schema language to describe and capture schemas of
concepts [25, 26]. With ShEx, we describe the RDF
structure by which Wikidata content is made available. These Shapes have the advantage that they are
easily exchanged and describe linked-data models as
a single knowledge graph. Since the Shapes describe
the model, they enable discussion, revealing inconsistencies between resources, and allow for
consistency checks of the content added by automated procedures. Eventually, we would like to get
to a workflow where issues that can be fixed automatically are corrected, whereas biological inconsistencies will be made available for evaluation by field
experts and non-domain specific issues are acted
upon by the Wikidata community at large. 

The bot that synchronizes
the WikiPathways pathways with Wikidata was updated
from the original version to allow adding proteins annotated with Wikidata identifiers and no longer requires
pathways to be part of the WikiPathways Curated Collection. The customized bot source code is available.

Use cases
- BridgeDb

The mapping database has also been loaded on
the BridgeDb webservice which means it can be used
in the next use case: providing links out for
WikiPathways.

-WikiPathways

We manually annotated literature with the Wikidata items for specific
proteins and genes, particularly useful for virus concepts for which reference databases do not provide
entries, such as the non-structural proteins

Each resource uses different ways to access the data from a
user and machine perspective. Making use of these protocols programmatically to access and retrieve data of
interest requires the knowledge of various technologies
and procedures to extract the information of interest.
Wikidata provides a solution. It is part of the semantic
web, taking advantage of its reification of the Wikidata
items as RDF. 

In this case, this paper only represents one group contributing to the
Wikidata:WikiProject COVID-19 [53].

This manuscript presents a protocol to link information
from disparate resources, including NCBI Taxonomy,
NCBI Gene, UniProt, PubMed, and WikiPathways. Using
the existing Wikidata infrastructure, we developed semantic schemas for virus strains, genes, and proteins;
bots written in Python to add knowledge on genes and
proteins of the seven human coronaviruses and linked
them to biological pathways in WikiPathways and to primary literature, visualized in Scholia. We were able to do
so in the period of 2 weeks, using an ad hoc team from
existing collaborations, taking advantage of the open nature of the components involved.


# Comments

## Tags
1.2.4. Wikidata and Knowledge Graphs
1.3.3. Wikidata as a platform for representation of biological knowledge
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q105037759)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q105037759)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105037759/P921%3BP4510)  
