
ABDUCTIVE REASONING: A CONTRIBUTION TO KNOWLEDGE CREATION IN EDUCATION
======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q105870540]  
  
Publication date : 01 of March, 2019  

# Highlights

 To that end, I explain how scientific research approaches and processes are founded on the three types of logical inference: deduction, induction and abduction, all of which underpin knowledge building and the role of both science and researchers

  Nevertheless, the logical reasoning that structures investigative processes, as well as their epistemological implications, do not seem to be not very explicit, and even less conceptualized, particularly regarding the various views about science, knowledge and the role of the researcher. In other words, we must assume that scientific procedures have a significant logical and epistemological dimension. This is critical when it comes to praxeological research, which aims to combine knowledge-building processes and the processes involved in changing human and social realities.

  --> Interesting

  Abduction is an approach that works from a comprehensive theory of reality which prepares the empirical work and narrows the study field. The hypothesis is not given a priori; it emerges from data to then be verified.

  The hypothetical-deductive method can be defined as the “mental operation which consists, primarily, in starting with a proposition or set of propositions of universal (or at least general) reach, from which emerges a hypothesis or a set of hypotheses referring to particular cases”2 (GAUTHIER, 1986, p. 522). The type of reasoning behind this approach was posed by Aristotle (1995) in the Prior Analytics, an integral part of his Organon;3 in his theory of sign, this reasoning is called apodeixis.

  The stages of this approach (Table 3, left column) can be seen in the Aristotelian syllogism called apagoge, whose logical construction is shown in Table 3 (right column). This second way of reasoning corresponds to a permutation of the deductive syllogism A-B-C into the form B-C-A. It consists in finding a rule (A) that could account for the result (C) if the empirical observation were true (B).

  --> That is way more common than the ABC method

  This is resumed in the following observation by Hume:8 “What entitles one to pretend that what we infer from cases observed will continue to hold for cases not yet observed?”

  Reducing abduction purely to terms of logical inference is a mistake: therefore, at least two epistemological senses can be established for the term abduction. Definition 1: the inferential process through which plausible hypotheses are generated - we can call it creative abduction. Definition 2: the inferential process through which the best explanation is established and hypotheses are evaluated - we can call it evaluative abduction (MAGNANI, 1998, p. 1,15 cited in RODRÍGUEZ, 2005, p. 93-94). 

  Abduction can be understood as the inference of a case (B) from a rule (A) and a result (C). It has a poor degree of veracity or, as Peirce puts it, something may be the “case” (CP 5.171) if it is a belief accepted by inference from knowledge pre-established in the premises - i.e., rule and result. Thus, the three types of reasoning can be classified as explanatory, when they make clear what is already contained in the premises, and expansive, i.e., reasonings that increase knowledge (CP 2. 623).

	Explanatory or analytic 	Deduction
Expansive or synthetic 	Induction and Hypothesis (Abduction)

--> Interesting way to put it


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q105870540)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q105870540)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105870540/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q105870540&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105870540/P921%3BP4510)  
