
A review of the semantic web field
==================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q105079960]  
  
Publication date : 25 of January, 2021  

# Highlights
The term Semantic Web as used in this article
is a field of research rather than a concrete artifact—in
a similar way, say, Artificial Intelligence denotes a field
of research rather than a concrete artifact. 

One perspective is that the field is all
about the long-term goal of creating The
Semantic Web (as an artifact) together
with all the necessary tools and methods required for creation, maintenance, and
application. In this particular narrative,
The Semantic Web is usually envisioned
as an enhancement of the current World
Wide Web with machine-understandable information (as opposed to most of
the current Web, which is mostly targeted
at human consumption), together with
services—intelligent agents—utilizing this
information. 


In the Semantic
Web, this metadata is generally in the
form of ontologies, or at least a formal
language with a logic-based semantics
that admits reasoning over the meaning
of the data.

Perhaps, each of these three perspectives has merit, and the field exists in a
confluence of these, with ontologies,
linked data, knowledge graphs, being key
concepts for the field, W3C standards
around RDF, OWL, and SPARQL constituting technical exchange formats that
unify the field on a syntactic (and to a certain extent, semantic) level


In a
more precise sense (and perhaps a bit
post-hoc), an ontology is really a knowledge base (in the sense of symbolic artificial intelligence) of concepts (that is,
types or classes, such as “mammal” and
“live birth”) and their relationships
(such as, “mammals give live birth”)

From this perspective, an OWL ontology can serve as a schema (or a logic of
types) for the RDF (typed) graph

One of the most well-known and
used linked datasets is DBpedia,22
which is a linked dataset extracted
from Wikipedia (and, more recently,
also Wikidata). T

During the Linked Data era, ontologies played a much less prominent
role. They often were used as schemas
in that they informed the internal
structure of RDF datasets, however, the
information in RDF graphs in the
Linked Data Cloud was shallow and
relatively simplistic compared to the
overpromises and depth of research
from the Ontologies era

It was also during this time (2011)
when schema.org appeared on the
scene.6
 Initially driven by Bing, Google,
and Yahoo!—and slightly later joined
by Yandex—schema.org made public a
relatively simple ontologyu and suggested that website providers annotate
(that is, link) entities on their sites
with the schema.org vocabulary

Another prominent effort launched
in 2012 is Wikidata,39 which started as a project at Wikimedia Deutschland funded among others by Google, Yandex, and
the Allen Institute for AI. Wikidata is
based on a similar idea as Wikipedia,
namely, to crowdsource information,
However, while Wikipedia is providing
encyclopedia-style texts (with human
readers as the main consumers), Wikidata is about creating structured data
that can be used by programs or in other
projects. For example, many other Wikimedia efforts, including Wikipedia, use
Wikidata to provide some of the information they present to human readers.
As of the time of this writing, Wikidata
has over 66 million data items, has had
over one billion edits since project
launch, and has over 20,000 active users.v
Database downloads are available in several W3C standards, including RDF.

--> It has more than 90 million items.  - 1.2.4. Wikidata and Knowledge Graphs


Knowledge Graphs. In 2012, a new
term appeared on the scene when Google
launched its Knowledge Graph

While Google does not provide the
Knowledge Graph for download, it does
provide an API to access contentw—the
API uses standard schema.org types
and is compliant with JSON-LD,34 which
is essentially an alternative syntax for
RDF standardized by the W3C.

-->  - 1.2.4. Wikidata and Knowledge Graphs

s the term Linked Open
Data has suggested from the very beginning, the linked data efforts by the
Semantic Web community mostly had
open sharing of data for reuse as one
its goals, which means that linked data
is mostly made freely available for
download or by SPARQL endpoint, and
the use of non-restricting licenses is
considered of importance in the community. Wikidata as a knowledge
graph is also unowned, and open. 

Machine learning, and in particular
deep learning, are being investigated as
to their capability to improve hard tasks
arriving in a Semantic Web context, such
as knowledge graph completion (in the
sense of adding missing relations), dealing with noisy data, and so on.4,10 At the
same time, Semantic Web technologies
are being investigated as to their potential to advance explainable AI.10,21

Some areas in the life sciences have
already a considerable history of benefiting from Semantic Web technologies, for example, the previously noted
SNOMED-CT and Gene Ontology. Generally speaking, biomedical fields were
early adopters of Semantic Web concepts. Another prominent example
would be the development of the
ICD11, which was driven by Semantic
Web technologies.38


Writing
high-quality introductory textbooks as
a means to consolidate a field is very
time-consuming and returns very little
academic credit. Yet, the academic
community does provide a basis for
consolidation, by developing solutions
that bridge between paradigms, and by
partnering with application areas to
develop and materialize use-cases.

Within its first approximate 20 years
of existence, the Semantic Web field
has produced a wealth of knowledge
regarding efficient data management
for data sharing, discovery, integration, and reuse. The contributions of
the field are best understood by means
of the applications they have given rise
to, including Schema.org, industrial
knowledge graphs, Wikidata, ontology
modeling applications, among other
fields discussed throughout this article.



# Comments 

Wow, even a video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1FmzOlsGAG8

## Tags
- 1.2.3. Web of Data and Linked Open Data

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q105079960)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q105079960)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105079960/P921%3BP4510)  
