
Undiscovered Public Knowledge
=============================
  
  [@wikidata:Q105516839]  
  
Publication date : 01 of April, 1986  

# Highlights
Knowledge can be public, yet undiscovered, if independently created fragments
are logically related but never retrieved, brought together, and interpreted.

therefore makes possible, and plausible, the existence of undiscovered
public knowledge. Three examples intended to throw light on the logic of
undiscovered knowledge are constructed and analyzed. The argument is developed within the framework of a Popperian or critical approach within science
and on Popper's distinction between subjective and objective knowledge

"positivism." In that system, science was seen as the only valid and
certain form of knowledge-certain because it was based on facts and on
laws derived as generalizations from those facts. "Observed facts" and
"direct observation" were enshrined as tokens of reality 

Popper showed that scientific laws or
theories cannot be induced or derived from observed facts or data;
theories start from conjectures or free inventions. But these inventions
confront, and may clash with, the real world.

here is a crucially important duality then between
the putative "real world" and our knowledge about that world. We are of
course part of the world, and continually interact with it, but we cannot
gain certain or true knowledge about it.

For we must ask in any event, If theories are guesswork, what
makes one guess better than another?

That question has a number of answers, and I cannot here do more
than hint at their general nature. 

First of all, a guess that can be tested
against the real world is better than one that cannot be tested
econd, a guess that has been tested and passed the test is better than a
guess that has failed the same test-other things being equal. 
More
generally, a guess that has withstood critical argument by many scholars
and scientists is better than one that has not. The role of criticism is
therefore central to the process by which knowledge grows and becomes
accepted. 

Knowledge begins therefore with conjecture, hypothesis, or theory, all
of which mean about the same thing. Scientific knowledge grows
through testing and criticizing theories and through replacing theories
with better ones that can withstand more severe tests and criticism

--> Not kind of Popper states. It doesn't say that this is what happens, but (generally) what should happen for science to be logically consistent

The world of published knowledge certainly contains more than any
one person can know and indeed contains more than the aggregate of
what all persons know.

 Popper, who divides the world
of reality, like all of Gaul, into three parts. World 1 is the physical world,
World 2 is the world of subjective knowledge or experience, of mental
states and mental processes, and World 3 is the world of objective
knowledge-the world of problems, theories, and other products of the
human mind. World 3 is real in that, through interacting with World 2,
it can influence World 1, the ultimate standard of reality. That is, man
can use theories and plans, grasped and understood subjectively, to
modify the physical world [3]

The objective state of World 3, and what we subjectively know about
World 3, are quite different concepts.

How knowledge can be
public yet undiscovered will, I think, be made plausible by the following
examples.
Example I-Black Swans: A Hidden Refutation
The statement "all swans are white" can be thought of as the prototype
of a simple scientific universal hypothesis or theory about the physical
world-universal because of the unqualified "a

Suppose for the sake of argument that scientists living in a remote part
of the world were to publish, in a local wildlife journal, some observations about a family of black swans living on a nearby lake.
Their recorded comments about black swans were not made therefore as
an intentional test of the hypothesis that all swans are white. Let us
assume that those published comments were incidental to an article on
some other topic, and, moreover, escaped the notice of indexers. 

two elements of information-the hypothesis and its refutation-may
not both be known to any one person, at least not for some period of
time, owing to the difficulties of identifying, locating, and gaining access
to the relevant published information

Popper defines the severity of a test in
terms of the difference between the probability of the evidence, given
the hypothesis, p(e,h). and the probability of the evidence without the
hypothesis, p(e). That difference, p(e,h) - p(e), may also be called the
weight of the evidence e in favor of the theory h.

Each test taken alone is relatively weak in that
other explanations can readily be adduced to account for the observed
data. Yet, taken together, the combined evidence offers much stronger
support for the hypothesis than was suggested or claimed in any
scientific publication of that period-and so we may infer that the
degree to which the lung cancer hypothesis had withstood tests was
undiscovered.

 Most importantly, search functions and scientific theories
are systems of conjectures, forever criticizable and forever improvable.
In that sense there are no limits to either science or information retrieval. But then, too, there are no final answers. 

The growth of scientific
knowledge is usually thought of in terms of wresting new discoveries
from the physical world-World 1-admittedly a world that offers
unlimited opportunity for discovery. But it should be of interest to
librarians to notice that World 3 also qualifies as an endless frontier and
to understand how and why this is so.8 


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q105516839)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q105516839)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105516839/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Undiscovered%20Public%20Knowledge'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
