
Querying biomedical Linked Data with natural language questions
===============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q105870677]  
  
Publication date : 25 of January, 2017  

# Highlights

 Linked  Data  can  then  be  queriedthrough a SPARQL endpoint. However, typical usersof this knowledge, such as physicians, life-science re-searchers or even patients, can manage neither the syn-tactic and semantic requirements of the SPARQL lan-guage,  nor  the  structure  of  various  KBs


Themain challenge is then to design optimal methodolo-gies  for  an  easy  and  reproducible  rewriting  of  natu-ral  language  questions  into  SPARQL  queries.  In  theremainder of this work, the termquestionmeans thenatural language expressions uttered by human usersto  formulate  their  information  need,  while  the  termquerydesignates the same expression formalised withthe SPARQL syntax and semantics.

Notice that recently, the Question Answering overLinked  Data  (QALD-4)  challenge  proposed  the  taskBiomedical question answering over interlinked data,

--> cool

The  objective  of  our  work  is  to  propose  an  end-to-end method for translating natural language ques-tions into SPARQL queries and for querying KBs.

atural  language  questions  areannotated withlinguistic  and  semantic  information(Sec-tion4.1). This step aims at associating a linguisticand  semantic  description  with  words  and  termsconstituting the questions.–Linguistic and semantic information is  used  forabstracting questions(Section4.2).  This  stepaims at identifying relevant elements within ques-tions and at building a representation of these el-ements.–The abstracted questions are used forconstruct-ing the corresponding SPARQL query rep-resentations(Section4.3).  This  step  joins  to-gether previously identified elements and definesa structure representing the SPARQL graph pat-tern.


4.4.  Query generationThe  SPARQL  query  representation  built  duringthequery  constructionstep  is  used  to  generate  theSPARQL query string. Figure9illustrates the gener-ated  queries  which  correspond  to  the  example  ques-tions.




# Comments

## Tags
1.2.3. Web of Data and Linked Open Data


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q105870677)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q105870677)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105870677/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q105870677&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
