
A flagellate-to-amoeboid switch in the closest living relatives of animals
==========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q105870433]  
  
Publication date : 15 of January, 2021  

# Highlights
Amoeboid cell types are fundamental to animal biology and broadly distributed acrossanimal diversity, but their evolutionary origin is unclear.

--> In line with the - 2.4.2.1.1 Evolutionary cell types field


Here, we show that choanoflagellatessubjected to confinement become amoeboid by retracting their flagella and activating myosin-based motility. This switch allows escape from confinement and is conserved acrosschoanoflagellate diversity. The conservation of the amoeboid cell phenotype across animals andchoanoflagellates, together with the conserved role of myosin, is consistent with homology ofamoeboid motility in both lineages

--> Super cool! Is the ameboid choanoflagellate an instance of a different type or a different state? (no answer possible without defs)

We hypothesize that the differentiation between animalepithelial and crawling cells might have evolved from a stress-induced switch between flagellateand amoeboid forms in their single-celled ancestors

In contrast, Metchnikoff proposed in 1886 that ani-mals  originated  from  colonies  of  flagellated  cells  resembling  modern  choanoflagellates(Metchnikoff, 1886), a view that was incorporated into later interpretations of Haeckel’s Gastraeahypothesis (Nielsen, 2008). An intermediate view (Willmer, 1971) was inspired by the discovery ofprotozoans such asNaegleria, which alternate between a flagellate and an amoeboid form (Schar-dinger, 1899;Fulton, 1977)

We report here on our recent and serendipitous discovery of environmentally relevant conditionsunder which the choanoflagellateSalpingoeca rosettatransdifferentiates from a flagellated stateinto an amoeboid state.

--> They call state. Video is really cool, it could go to Wikipedia.

(B) ConfinedS. rosettacells underwent a rapid phenotypictransition, first from a flagellate form into an amoeboflagellate form, and eventually into an amoeboid form (thatinitially retains microvill

--> Two very different morphologies. 20 minutes transition grants its "state" status.

Amoeboid cells retain cytoplasmic microtubules

--> Talking about a state like a class

The discovery of an amoeboid switch in a choanoflagellate has the potential to inform the ancestryof amoeboid cells in animals


Specialized crawling cell types are present inmultiple  animal  lineages,  including  sponges(archeocytes), ctenophores (stellate cells), cnidar-ians  (amoebocytes),  invertebrate  bilaterians(amoebocytes), and vertebrates (white blood cellsand mesenchymal cells) (Table S1;Figure 6—fig-ure supplement 1). Our results raise the possibil-ity  that  that  these  might  have  evolved  bystabilization of an ancestral stress response toconfinement, representing an example of evolu-tion of a cell type from temporally alternatingphenotypes (in line with the ‘temporal-to-spatialtransition’ hypothesi

--> Very cool 

while the response to confine-ment might have been maintained during animal evolution, the predominant source of confinementmight have switched from the external environment to the organism itself. Such ‘internal pressure’might have existed at early stages in the evolution of multicellularit

(N–P) Commonalities and differences in the regulation of cellular phenotypictransitions in choanoflagellates, sponges, and vertebrates

--> Man, these are some super cool models for Wikidata. 

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q105870433)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q105870433)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105870433/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q105870433&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105870433/P921%3BP4510)  
