
Support for Accessibility, Reproducibility and Transparency in a Service-Oriented Gene Expression Analysis Platform
==========
  
  [@wikidata:Q106369750]  
  

# Highlights

SemanticSCo  consists  ofan   integrated   platform   that   allows   the   development   of   agene expression analysis workflow based on the semiautomaticcomposition  of  semantic  web  services.  SemanticSCo  provideslimited  support  for  accessibility.  Further,  the  platform  lackssupport  for  reproducibility  and  transparency.  This  paper  de-scribes how accessibility was improved and how reproducibilityand   transparency   were   introduced   into   a   new   version   ofthe  platform,  called  SemanticSCo  Web


SemanticSCo  [9]  consists  of  a  desktop-based  platformanalysis  that  supports  the  semiautomatic  composition  ofgene expression semantic web services. This platform allowsits  users  to  create  and  execute  analysis  workflows  basedon  the  semantic  composition  of  a  set  of  RESTful  servicesavailable from a gene expression service repository.

SemanticSCo Web was built using Java Enterprise Edition7 (JEE) and HTML 5. 

SemanticSCo  Web  supports  the  upload  of  input  datanot  only  from  a  local  file,  but  also  from  two  well-knownfunctional  genomic  data  repositories:  ArrayExpress  [14]and  Gene  Expression  Omnibus  (GEO)  [16].  ArrayExpressprovides   a   RESTful   programmatic   access   interface   thatallows  one  to  recover  any  available  experiment  data  usingan ArrayExpress accession number from both ArrayExpressitself and GEO. Thus, we use ArrayExpress as a single inputdata source for remote data upload.



The development of this case study was divided into threesteps.  In  the  first  step,  one  of  the  authors  of  the  originalstudy  formulated  a  set  of  questions  of  interest  that  shouldbe  answered  through  our  reproduction  study.  Examples  ofthese questions include:•How many genes were upregulated and downregulatedin mesenchymal stromal cells from patients with Type-1  Diabetes  (T1D-MSCs)  compared  with  those  fromhealthy individuals (C-MSCs)?•Is theCXCL12gene upregulated inT1D-MSCscom-pared to theC-MSCs? What other genes have expres-sion profile similar to theCXCL12gene?In the second step, we created a set of four workflows toanswer the posed questions. Figure 3 illustrates the workflowcreated for the differential analysis study.

The   first   step   towards   the   creation   of   this   workflowwas   the   definition   of   the   data   sources.   We   have   usedthe  platform  integration  capability  to  directly  retrieve  theset   of   normalized   gene   expression   data   from   ArrayEx-press. These data were then semantically annotated asLog-transformed One-color Normalized Microarray Data. Next,we  have  used  aSplitteradaptation  service  to  separateT1D-MSCsfromC-MSCsnormalized  data.  Then,  bothsets  of  data  were  used  as  input  for  theTwo-sampleStudent’s T Testdifferential analysis service. Finally,we  have  used  theUp Regulated Gene ExtractionandDown Regulated Gene Extractionadaptationservices to extract the set of upregulated and downregulatedgenes, respectively.

--> Cool stuff


The  first  major  improvement  on  accessibility  supportintroduced  to  SemanticSCo  Web  was  the  development  ofa unified, web-based interface. The provision of such inter-face  allows  the  access  to  the  platform  from  any  Internet-connected device equipped with a web browser, without theneed to download and/or install a local (client) application.

The  third  major  improvement  on  accessibility  supportintroduced  to  SemanticSCo  Web  was  development  of  anintegration mechanism with ArrayExpress and GEO. Thus,platform users can now upload source gene expression datalocally or remotely from these popular functional genomicsdata repositories

Thus,  public  sharing  of  workflows  opens  upmany possibilities, for example, when writing an article, theauthors  could  publicly  make  their  experiment  available  onthe platform, so a reviewer can access the workflow in orderto reproduce and validate the obtained results. On the otherhand, other researchers could also use the shared workflowas  a  basis  for  the  development  of  new  research  from  theresults already achieved.


# Comments

Very techy, a bit far from my field of expertise. Interesting, though.

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q106369750)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q106369750)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q106369750/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q106369750&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
