
The Tyranny of Merit: What's Become of the Common Good?

==========
  
  [@wikidata:Q106114584]  
  
# Highlights

## Chapter 4 - Credentialism: THE LAST ACCEPTABLE PREJUDICE
 By the 2000s, how well one did in college, or even on
college entrance exams, loomed large enough to cast glory or disrepute on a
president. Donald Trump certainly thought so. He first attempted to
discredit Obama by demanding his birth certificate, casting doubt on his
citizenship. When that failed, he leveled against Obama the next most
potent insult he could imagine, casting doubt on his meritocratic
credentials.

--> As notas de fato acabam influenciando o futuro. E isso alimenta o sistema pautado em notas, e não em conhecimento. Triste.

Shortly after appointing his
first cabinet, he proclaimed, “We have by far the highest IQ of any Cabinet
ever assembled!” 

--> Bizarre if true, even more bizarre that it is (very likely) false.

What is striking,however, is not that politicians inflate their college credentials, but that they feel the need to do so.

But by 2018, credentialism had become so pervasive a basis of
judgment that it served as a kind of all-purpose rhetoric of credibility,
deployed in moral and political combat far beyond the campus gates.

But put aside, for the moment, the
question of whether the meritocratic ideal is an adequate basis for a just
society and consider the attitudes toward success and failure it promotes.

Thomas Frank, an author with populist sensibilities, criticized liberals’
focus on education as the remedy for inequality: “To the liberal class, every
big economic problem is really an education problem, a failure by the losers
to learn the right skills and get the credentials everyone knows you’ll need
in the society of the future.”

--> Strong counterpoint

When
meritocratic elites tie success and failure so closely to one’s ability to earn a
college degree, they implicitly blame those without one for the harsh
conditions they encounter in the global economy

Second, by telling workers that their inadequate education is to blame for
their troubles, meritocrats moralize success and failure and unwittingly
promote credentialism—an insidious prejudice against those who have not
been to college

Barofsky suggests a further,
meritocratic explanation—the belief among policy makers that wellcredentialed, sophisticated investment bankers deserved the massive
amounts they were paid.


Prior to the 1980s, U.S. presidents rarely used the word “smart,” and when
they did, it was typically in the traditional sense. (“The American people
are smart.”) George H. W. Bush began using the word in its new, digital-age
sense. He spoke of “smart cars,” “smart freeways,” “smart weapons,”
“smart schools.” The use of “smart” in presidential rhetoric exploded with
Bill Clinton and George W. Bush, each of whom used it more than 450
times. Obama used it more than 900 times.

--> Artificial "smartness" x Artificial "intelligent", what is the difference, really?

Defending one’s policies as smart rather than dumb is closely akin to
credentialist ways of talking about people. 

GOVERNMENT BY DEGREE
By the 2000s, citizens without a college degree were not only looked down
upon; in the United States and Western Europe, they were virtually absent
from elective office. 

The cachet of a PhD is so considerable in German politics that scandals rage
over plagiarism in doctoral dissertations, forcing cabinet ministers to resign.

--> O caso de credencialismo do ministério da educação dá um estudo de caso prático bem recheado.

Since the 1980s, non–university
graduates have moved away from the Socialists and other left parties, which
have become the parties of educational elites. In the 1950s and 1960s, left
parties were working-class parties; the share of non-graduates voting for the
left was about 20 percentage points higher than among university graduates.

--> Seria interessante ver isso no Brasil, hein. 

 As recently as 2015, Republicans
and Democrats alike said that colleges and universities have a positive
effect on the country. This is no longer the case. Today, 59 percent of
Republicans believe that colleges and universities have a negative effect on
the way things are going in the country, and only 33 percent view higher
education favorably.

--> wtf

Closely connected to these credentialist ills is the technocratic turn of public
discourse. The more policy-making is described as a matter of “smart
versus dumb,” the greater the case for having “smart” people (experts and
elites) decide things, rather than allowing citizens to debate and decide what
policies to enact. 

To govern a democratic society requires
contending with disagreement. Governing in the face of disagreement
presupposes a view about how disagreements arise, and how they might be
overcome in this or that moment, for this or that public purpose. Obama
believed that the primary source of democratic disagreement is that
ordinary citizens lack sufficient information.

Mainly people—they’re just misinformed, or they are too busy,
they’re trying to get their kids to school, they’re working, they just
don’t have enough information, or they’re not professionals at
sorting out all the information that’s out there, and so our political
process gets skewed. But if you give them good information, their
instincts are good and they will make good decisions. And the
president has the bully pulpit to give them good information

--> Am I a technocrat?

Incentivizing was a technocratic concept that fit well with Obama’s
instinct for avoiding partisan or ideological wrangling. 

The populist upheavals of 2016—the Brexit vote in Britain and the
election of Trump in the United States—repudiated meritocratic elites and
the neoliberal, technocratic approach to politics. Replying to economists’
predictions that leaving the European Union would bring economic
hardship to the United Kingdom, a leading Brexit proponent replied, “The
people in this country have had enough of experts.


Particularly after the Cold War, you had this period of great
smugness on the part of America and American elites thinking we got this
all figured out.”

--> A kind of petit belle époque perhaps?

Studies of public opinion show that the more people
know about science, the more polarized are their views on climate change.
Republicans are more skeptical than Democrats about global warming,
and the partisan divide increases with education. Among Republicans with
a high school education or less, 57 percent believe global warming is
generally exaggerated. Among Republicans who are college graduates, 74
percent think so. Among Democrats, more education leads to greater
concern with climate change. Of Democrats with a high school education or
less, 27 percent consider global warming exaggerated; of Democrats with
college degrees, only 15 percent think so. 84

--> Interesting

More detailed studies have found that political polarization on climate
change tracks not only general levels of education but also scientific
knowledge. People with greater scientific knowledge, as measured by
science courses taken and tests of scientific literacy, are more likely than
those who know less about science to adhere to their party’s views on
climate change. 86
These findings challenge the idea that those unwilling to support
measures to alleviate climate change are simply ill-informed about science


These are not scientific questions to be answered by experts. They are
questions about power, morality, authority, and trust, which is to say they
are questions for democratic citizens

 Facing up to the failures of meritocracy and technocracy is an
indispensable step toward addressing that discontent and reimagining a
politics of the common good


# Comments

Poderia destilar melhor a diferença de tecnocracia e "credenciocracia", que fica um pouco amalgamado. 


## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q106114584)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q106114584)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q106114584/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q106114584&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q106114584/P921%3BP4510)  
