
Sharing biological data: why, when, and how
===========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q106498418]  
  
Publication date : 01 of April, 2021  

# Highlights

Here, we outline good practices to make your biological data publicly accessible and usable, generally and for several specific kinds of data.

The FAIR principles outline clear standards for ensuring that others can find and access your data and that once accessed, users can easily understand and reuse the data. The FAIR principles provide a clear collection of important details to include within your data and metadata (see ‘Data metadata and documentation’). 


Within the biological sciences, we have a problem of data waste—ostensibly shared data that no one ever uses. Many otherwise useful datasets go underused because researchers cannot effectively reuse the data. The inability to reuse arises from lack of discoverability, lack of important information provided, inconsistencies in data and metadata, and licensing issues.

Published manuscripts with reusable data will garner more citations and have more long‐term impact on scientific knowledge [[11]]

--> Good point for 3.8 The long tail of biocuration

You can consider putting off data sharing tasks as incurring a form of ‘sharing debt’, by analogy with the concept of technical debt used in software engineering. Delaying these tasks may appear to save you time in the short run, but sharing the data later will take at least as much time as doing it now. You may also incur interest, as it can take longer in the long run to handle individual requests for data availability. Taking a few hours now to organize data and submit it to a repository will save you much of this time.

Data and metadata

Data consist of recorded observations of the biological artifacts or models studied. Metadata describe the primary data and the resources used to generate it.

We regard README files as essential for making your data easy to navigate. Below, we include specific recommendations on README files for different types of biological data.

We recommend dedicating your data to the public domain with the CC0 Universal Public Domain Dedication (https://creativecommons.org/choose/zero/). Using CC0 maximizes the ability for others to reuse and remix the data. Other guidelines recommend CC0 [[4, 36]] and many journals and repositories require it.

Certain organizational tactics make data much more interpretable and reduce errors. Broman & Woo [[43]] and Ellis & Leek [[44]] provide excellent suggestions on how to organize tabular data. First, ensure that you use the same labels in all areas of your data. For example, inconsistent sex labels, such as ‘female’


# Comments

## Tags


3.8 The long tail of biocuration

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q106498418)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q106498418)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q106498418/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q106498418&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/1873-3468.14067)  
