
Tumor to normal single-cell mRNA comparisons reveal a pan-neuroblastoma cancer cell
===================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q106642644]  
  
Publication date : 01 of February, 2021  

# Highlights

Here, we sought to reveal the phenotype of neuroblastoma cancer cells by comparing cancer (n = 19,723) with normal fetal adrenal single-cell transcriptomes (n = 57,972).

--> I wonder why

Neuroblastoma arises from aberrant differentiation of the neural crest, mostly within the fetal adrenal medulla, via the sympathetic lineage

Fig. 1 Single-cell reference data from seven human fetal adrenal glands.

B) UMAP (Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection) representation of 57,972 fetal adrenal gland cells. Medullary cells (n = 6451) are highlighted in black.
. (C) Cell type assignment by canonical correlation analysis as implemented in the TransferData function in Seurat. Murine medullary cell types, as defined by Furlan et al.

--> Transfer of labels across species, this merits deeper consideration

Recent single-cell analyses of murine fetal adrenal glands have provided transcriptional definitions of four principal medullary cell types (8–10): Schwann cell precursor (SCP), bridge cells, chromaffin cells, and sympathoblasts.


To search for these cell types within our data, we used two orthogonal unbiased methods (logistic regression and canonical correlation analysis) to quantitatively map murine reference signals onto our human data. Unlike manual annotation of cells by a selection of (biased) marker genes, these approaches avoid the risk of misclassifying cells when interspecies differences on individual markers exist.

Recent single-cell analyses of murine fetal adrenal glands have provided transcriptional definitions of four principal medullary cell types (8–10): Schwann cell precursor (SCP), bridge cells, chromaffin cells, and sympathoblasts. 

Accordingly, we identified the human correlates of the four medullary cell types (Fig. 1, C and D).

--> fetal adrenal medulla, "validation" of mouse stricto sensu cell types, 2.4.4.2.1 The cell archetype and 
2.4.4.2.2 The sensu stricto cell type



Of particular note were the neural crest–like SCP cells, identified previously in murine (8), but not human, fetal tissues. 

We validated these cells by single-molecule fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) of SCP defining markers (SOX10, ERBB3, MPZ, and PLP1) in the fetal medulla and other human fetal organs—fetal gut, eye, skin, and bone (fig. S2). 

We next sought to establish the relationship between neuroblastoma cells and human fetal medullary development. We generated single-cell mRNA readouts from 21 fresh neuroblastoma specimens from two different centers using two platforms (Chromium 10x and CEL-Seq2).

The first challenge was to identify bona fide cancer cells among tumor-derived cells. Marker-based cell typing alone was of limited value, as controversy exists as to which cell types in neuroblastoma represent cancer cells. 


Neuroblastomas that arose outside the adrenal gland also exhibited sympathoblast signals (Fig. 3B). The sympathoblast signal was present across the principal risk groups of neuroblastoma, suggesting that it transcends the clinical diversity of neuroblastoma (Fig. 3C).

We probed these expression data for transcripts that define the four populations of the normal human fetal medulla: SCPs, bridge cells, sympathoblasts, and chromaffin cells (fig. S1B). 

We identified cancer cells by directly assessing SNP ratios in regions of cancer defining copy number changes rather than inferring copy number from gene expression levels

Overall, our findings reveal an unexpected homogeneity in the cellular identity of neuroblastoma. Although future, larger-scale analyses may define the nuances of this signal and perhaps identify rare cancer cell types, our study would suggest that the principal normal cell correlate of neuroblastoma is the human fetal sympathoblast.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q106642644)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q106642644)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q106642644/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q106642644&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIADV.ABD3311)  
