
Hypertension delays viral clearance and exacerbates airway hyperinflammation in patients with COVID-19
======================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q106686666]  
  
Publication date : 24 of December, 2020  

# Highlights

Combining clinical data (n = 144) and single-cell sequencing data of airway samples (n = 48) with in vitro experiments, we observed a distinct inflammatory predisposition of immune cells in patients with hypertension that correlated with critical COVID-19 progression. 

To this end, we evaluated the effect of coexisting cardiovascular illnesses, in particular of hypertension and anti-hypertensive treatment, on COVID-19 pathology and viral clearance based on two German prospective cohorts.

we provide insights into the differential COVID-19 pathology in patients treated with ACEI/ARB compared to patients without cardiovascular diseases or with a different anti-hypertensive treatment.

The proportion of patients with a critical outcome was significantly increased for HT+/CVD+/− patients (n = 90) compared to HT−/CVD− patients with COVID-19 (n = 54, P = 0.002). For HT+ patients, the proportion for critical COVID-19 was highest without ACEI or ARB treatment: almost 77% of HT+/CVD− patients without ACEI or ARB and over 70% of HT+/CVD+ patients without ACEI or ARB showed critical COVID-19 (Supplementary Table 2 and Fig. 1a). In contrast, ACEI and ARB treatments were associated with a decreased proportion of critical COVID-19 in both groups (HT+/CVD− and HT+/CVD+); 

Taken together, we showed that viral clearance in HT+/CVD+/− patients under ACEI treatment was similar to that in patients with COVID-19 without a coexisting cardiovascular disease, whereas viral clearance might have been delayed in patients undergoing hypertensive ARB treatment.

anti-hypertensive treatment did not alter ACE2 expression, in neither patients positive for SARS-CoV-2 nor patients negative for SARS-CoV-2,


We identified hypertension-associated elevated immunological activity as the prominent factor contributing to the increased risk of hypertensive patients for a more critical course of COVID-19. 


This study demonstrated an immune activation in hypertensive patients that was largely augmented under COVID-19 and might provide an explanation for the adverse course of the disease related to a hyperinflammatory response in these patients.

s. Our data are in line with the general guideline recommendations discouraging discontinuation of ACEI or ARB treatment. In fact, our results might suggest that ACEI could be the more beneficial anti-hypertensive treatment during COVID-19. 


# Comments

Good article

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q106686666)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q106686666)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q106686666/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q106686666&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41587-020-00796-1)  
