
Question Answering Over Temporal Knowledge Graphs
=================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q107297399]  
  
Publication date : 02 of June, 2021  

# Highlights
Temporal Knowledge Graphs (Temporal KGs)
extend regular Knowledge Graphs by provid-
ing temporal scopes (e.g., start and end times)
on each edge in the KG. While Question An-
swering over KG (KGQA) has received some
attention from the research community, QA
over Temporal KGs (Temporal KGQA) is a
relatively unexplored area

n KGQA, the answer is usually an entity (node) in the KG, and the
reasoning required to answer questions is either
single-fact based (Bordes et al., 2015), multi-hop
(Yih et al. 2015, Zhang et al. 2017) or conjunc-
tion/comparison based reasoning (Talmor and Be-
rant, 2018). Temporal KGQA takes this a stepfurther where:

1. The underlying KG is a Temporal KG.
2. The answer is either an entity or time duration.
3. Complex temporal reasoning might be needed.


CRONQUESTIONS (ours) WikiData 333100% 410k

--> Nice!! 

CRONQUESTIONS consists of both a temporal KG and accom-
panying natural language questions.

Our source code along with the CRONQUESTIONS dataset can be found at
https://github.com/apoorvumang/CronKGQA.

TEQUILA (Jia et al., 2018b) is one method
aimed specifically at temporal KGQA. TEQUILA
decomposes and rewrites the question into non-
temporal sub-questions and temporal constraints.

Template When did {head}play in {tail}
Seed Qn When did Messi play in FC Barcelona
Human
Paraphrases
When was Messi playing in FC Barcelona
Which years did Messi play in FC Barcelona
When did FC Barcelona have Messi in their team
What time did Messi play in FC Barcelona
Machine
Paraphrases
When did Messi play for FC Barcelona
When did Messi play at FC Barcelona
When has Messi played at FC Barcelona

T5: In order to apply T5 (Raffel et al., 2020)
to temporal QA, we transform each question
in our dataset to the form ‘temporal question:
〈question〉?’. For evaluation there are two cases:
1. Time answer: We do exact string matching
between T5 output and correct answer.
2. Entity answer: We compare the system output
to the aliases of all entities in the KG. The
entity having an alias with the smallest edit
distance (Levenshtein, 1966) to the predicted
text output is taken as the predicted entity

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q107297399)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q107297399)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q107297399/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q107297399&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
