
Guidelines for writing definitions in ontologies
================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q107380429]  
  
Publication date : 28 of December, 2017  

# Highlights

Textual definitions allow ontologists and data curators to understand the intended meaning of ontology terms and to use these terms in a consistent fashion across contexts. Logical definitions allow machines to check the integrity of ontologies and reason over data annotated with ontology terms to make inferences that promote knowledge discovery. Therefore, it is important not only to include in ontologies multiple types of definitions in both formal and in natural languages, but also to ensure that these definitions meet good quality standards so they are useful

This paper aims to fill this gap by providing the ontology community with a set of principles and conventions to assist in definition writing, editing, and validation, by drawing on existing definition writing principles and guidelines in lexicography, terminology, and logic.

According  to  a  recent  survey  we  conducted  on  definition practices in ontologies (SEPPÄLÄ, 2013; SEPPÄLÄ;  RUTTENBERG,  2013),  ontologists  often    lack    adequate    training    in    definition    writing.  

Ontological definitions, in contrast, are for ‘terms’, singular noun phrases which are content words that form part of a domain-specific vocabulary 

Here  we  focus  on  two:  (i)  intension  and  (ii)  representational artifact. The former is the content or meaning of the definition and has a counterpart on  the  side  of  reality  –  the  set  of  things,  at  any  given time, to which the definition applies – which is  called  the  extension  of  a  definition.  The  latter  is  the form of the definition, the natural language text and potentially the accompanying axioms in some logical formalism that express this meaning. Good definition writing hinges on recognizing that these are the two sides of a single coin.

Broadly,  a  definition  has  the  canonical  form  X  is  a  Y  that  Zs  as  in  example  (1)  adapted  from  the  definition   of   ‘ligament’   (synonym   of   ‘skeletal   ligament’)  in  the  Uberon  multi-species  anatomy  ontology (UBERON).(1)A ligament  is  a  dense  regular  connective tissue connecting two or more adjacent skeletal elements.

Definitions in this form have a three-part structure:1. a definiendum [X], i.e., the defined term;2. a definiens [a  Y  that  Zs],  i.e.,  the  part  that  expresses  the  definition  content  and  that  is  called a definition in dictionaries;3. a copula [is]  that  expresses  an  equivalence  between definiendum and definiens.


The definiens  –  in  italics  –  is  subdivided  into  at  least two parts:
  • The genus – connective tissue –which constitutes the head of the definition (the Y part) and tells us what kind of thing the defined term denotes. When the genus is the immediate superordinate term it is called the genus proximus.
  • One  or  more  differentia(e)  (the  Z  part(s)  or distinguishing  features)  –  dense,  regular  and connecting  two  or  more  adjacent  skeletal  elements –  that  tell  us  what  characterizes  the  things  referred  to  by  the  definiendum  and  what   distinguishes   them   from   the   things   referred to by the genus term and by all other terms under the same genus.

--> Top down approach
In    ontologies,    definitions    include    necessary conditions that apply to all the members of  the  extension,  but  which  may  also  apply  to  members of other term extensions, and, whenever possible, jointly sufficient conditions, which allow a  user  to  determine  whether  a  given  entity  is  a  member of the extension.

A    definition    that    contains    only    necessary    conditions   that   are   not   jointly   sufficient   to   rule  out  instances  that  are  not  members  of  the  extension  is  called  a  partial  definition. 

--> I guess most definitions are partial

Irrespective  of  the  type  of  resource  in  which  they  appear  and  their  context  of  use,  definitions  have  two primary functions: 
• a cognitive  function:  to  augment  or  reconfigure  (constrain or correct) our knowledge of the world relating to a given term, thus allowing us to better understand a term’s meaning in a specific context of   use   and   create   new   meaningful   semantic   connections and interpretations; 
• a linguistic function: to describe or prescribe what we should understand when one or more speakers use the defined term in a specific context of use

For  example,  at  the  cognitive  level,  the  definition  of the term ‘ligament’ in (3) tells us what a ligamentis  (some  physical  object),  what  itdoes  (it  has  a  connective  function),  and  what  its  properties  are  (it  has the physical qualities of being dense and regular). At the linguistic level, this definition tells us how the UBERON developers intended us to understand and use the term.

1. Guideline: conform to conventionsAuthors should conform  to the usual  linguistic and   lexicographic   conventions  of  the   English  language (where relevant extended by discipline specific idiolects).

A definition should avoid punctuation marks other  than  commas,  but  should  end  with  a  period if the first letter is capitalized.

The  definitions of ‘data set’ and ‘measurement datum’ in  the  Information  Artifact  Ontology  (IAO)  should  either  all  be  limited  to  the  definiens(recommended) or all contain the defined term and the ‘is’ copula.(5) ûdata item:  
A data item is an information content entity that... (IAO_0000027)
üdata  set:  A  data  item  that  is  an  aggregate  of  other  data  items  of  the  same type that... (IAO_0000100)
ûmeasurement            datum: A measurement datum is an information content entity that... (IAO_0000109)

Definitions  should  be  unique  (i.e.,  no  two terms in a single ontology should share what is, logically speaking, the same definition)

Guideline: use the genus-differentia form

Use the genus proximus, that is, the closest parent term.  This  ensures  that  the  genus  is  specific  enough  and  that  all  the  terms  at  the  same  level  have the same genus.

3.1.2. Guideline: avoid plurals


3.13. Guideline:     avoid     conjunctions     and     disjunctionsThe genus of a definition should be a single word: not a conjunction (10) and also not a disjunction (11). 

3.1.4. Guideline: avoid categorizersThe role of the genus of a definition is to categorize the  denoted  thing  under  a  more  general  type.  Therefore,  it  is  not  necessary  to  add  an  extra  categorizing expression, such as “type of ” and “sort of ”. These can usually be omitted, as in (12).(12)ûimmunogen: A  type  of  antigencapable  on  its  own  of  inducing  an immune response. (CHEBI_60816)üimmunogen: An antigen capable, on its own, of inducing an immune response.


ûmiosis 
AE: Miosis AE is an eye AE that is  a  term  with  various  definitions, which generally include constriction of the pupil. (OAE_0001998)ümiosis  AE:  An eye AE that generally includes constriction of the pupil.(14)
ûmammal: Representation of an animal that feeds its young with milk. (ARP; SMITH; SPEAR, 2015)ûmammal: A term that refers to  an  animal that feeds its young with milk.ümammal:An  animal  that  feeds  its young with milk.

The  first  two  examples  in  (14)  confound  the  class  and  the  term  with  the  thing  that  they  represent, respectively.


5.1. Guideline: avoid encyclopedic informationDefinitions should avoid including information that    goes    beyond    the    minimum    useful    information    for    specifying    the    intended    meaning of a term (15).

5.2. Guideline: avoid negative termsA definition that tells us what something is not is uninformative; it should tell us what something is.

However,  there  are  at  least  two  exceptions to this principle: (i) when the defined entity  is  inherently  negative  (18)  and  (ii)  when  the  negative  feature  is  a  distinguishing  feature  between two sibling classes (19).

5.3. Guideline: avoid definitions by extension
Definitions  by  extension  (20)  list  instances,  i.e.,  members of the definition’s extension, and do not tell  us  what  the  thing  being  defined  is,  unless  we  are already familiar with the listed instances

Circularity within the same definition occurs when a  class  is  defined  in  terms  of  itself  using  one  of  the labels attached to the class (25) or a synonym thereof (26), or some grammatically derived form, as  in  (27)  when  fearfulis  not  separately  defined  independently of fear.(25) ûtraining   objective: A training objective  which  is  fulfilled  by the  provision  of  some  training(OBI_0000962)üctraining   objective:   An objectivewhich  is  fulfilled  by  the  provision  of  some training.(26)ûlarge: The attribute of something that is big. (KELLEY, 1998)ülarge: The  attribute  something has when it has a measurable quality that  is  above  average.   (adapted   from the definition of large in WordNet 3.1)(27)ûfear: The  state  of  being fearful.(LANDAU, 2001)üfear: an  emotion  experienced  in anticipation of some specific pain or danger (WordNet 3.1)

9.1. Guideline: Avoid generalizing expressionsAvoid  the  use  of  expressions  such  as  “usually”  and “generally” since either• a  definition  is  already  a  statement  of  general  knowledge about a typical case (e.g., in biology) (30); or• the  feature  containing  the  expression  is  not  a  defining  feature,  but  rather  an  encyclopedic  piece  of  information  that  can  be  moved  to  a  separate ‘editor note’ annotation property (31).


9.2. Guideline: Avoid examples and lists 

9.4. Guideline:  Avoid  subjective  and  evaluative  statementSDefinitions should avoid any kind of subjective and  evaluative  language,  as  in  (35)  where  the  words  ‘delicious’  and  ‘beautiful’  are  removed  from  the  definition  without  any  change  in  the  informative content

Guideline:      define      abbreviations      and      acronymsAbbreviations  and  acronyms  should  be  defined  not explicated (36).

Finally,  these  definition  writing  guidelines  have  the added benefit of serving as a verification tool for existing ontology definitions.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q107380429)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q107380429)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q107380429/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q107380429&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
