
Towards a Deﬁnition of Knowledge Graphs
=======================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q107297398]  
  

# Highlights

Numerous research papers refer to Google’s Knowl-
edge Graph, although no official documentation about the
used methods exists. The prerequisite for widespread aca-
demic and commercial adoption of a concept or technology is
a common understanding, based ideally on a definition that
is free from ambiguity. We tackle this issue by discussing
and defining the term knowledge graph, considering its his-
tory and diversity in interpretations and use. 

And also Wikipedia,the most comprehensive encyclopedia in the web, does not
provide information about knowledge graphs in general, but
refers to the implementation by Google without mentioning
the existence of other knowledge graphs

--> I guess not true anymore

“Knowledge graphs are large networks of entities, their semantic types, properties, and
relationships between entities.”
Journal of Web Semantics [12

In the 1980s, researchers from the University of Groningen
and the University of Twente in the Netherlands initially
introduced the term knowledge graph to formally describe
their knowledge-based system that integrates knowledge from
different sources for representing natural language [10, 15].

In 2012, Google introduced the Knowledge Graph as a
semantic enhancement of Google’s search function that does
not match strings, but enables searching for “things”, in other
words, real-world objects [18]

(a) Google’s blog entry about their Knowledge
Graph is cited as if it provides a proper explanation for con-
stituting a knowledge graph (cf. [17, 19]), and (b) the terms
knowledge graph and knowledge base are used interchange-
ably (cf. [5, 7, 8, 13, 16, 20]). 


Figure 1 illustrates the combination of these assumptions,
which yields an abstract knowledge graph architecture. Based
on this architecture and derived from the terminological
analysis, we define a knowledge graph as follows:
A knowledge graph acquires and integrates infor-
mation into an ontology and applies a reasoner
to derive new knowledge.

Graph-based knowledge representation has been researched
for decades and the term knowledge graph does not consti-
tute a new technology. Rather, it is a buzzword reinvented
by Google and adopted by other companies and academia
to describe different knowledge representation applications

Our ongoing research focuses on an in-depth
analysis of our definition with respect to existing KG im-
plementations as well as the assessment of data quality in
knowledge graphs and their accessed sources.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q107297398)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q107297398)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q107297398/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q107297398&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
