A molecular single-cell lung atlas of lethal COVID-19
=====================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q107128138]  
  
Publication date : 29 of April, 2021  

# Highlights

Here we performed single-nucleus RNA sequencing of about 116,000 nuclei from the lungs of nineteen individuals who died of COVID-19 and underwent rapid autopsy and seven control individuals.

Alveolar type 2 cells adopted an inflammation-associated transient progenitor cell state and failed to undergo full transition into alveolar type 1 cells, resulting in impaired lung regeneration. 

We established a rapid autopsy program and, under Institutional Review Board approved protocols, collected snap-frozen organ specimens from individuals with COVID-19 within hours of death

The COVID-19 cohort consisted of 19 patients (12 males and 7 females) who died at a median age of 72 years (range, 58 to more than 89) (Supplementary Table 1, Extended Data Fig. 1a) and underwent rapid autopsy with a median post-mortem interval (PMI) of 4 h (range, 2–9 h). All had underlying co-morbidities that are associated with increased risk of severe COVID-1916 (Supplementary Table 1). The control cohort comprised 7 individuals (4 males and 3 females) with a median age of 70 years (range, 67 to 79 years) who underwent lung resection or biopsy in the pre-COVID-19 era (Supplementary Table 1).

We used a three-pronged approach for cell-type identification: unbiased identification of cluster markers, discovery of cell types using signatures from reported atlases, and manual curation to sub-stratify cell populations and cell states using expert knowledge.

 We report cell-type assignment with three levels of granularity: major cell types, intermediate granularity, and fine granularity (Supplementary Table 2).

 --> Lol, that is funny. Its cool, though, better than a plain classification. 2.4.2.1. Classification

At the most granular level, we identified 41 different cell types (Supplementary Table 2).

 We detected SARS-CoV-2 reads in two patients (Supplementary Table 3), one of whom had HIV/AIDS (CD4+ T cell count 29 per mm3 on hospital admission; 662 unique molecular identifiers detected in 28 cells), which suggests that viral reads can, in principle, be captured.

 Myeloid cells from individuals with COVID-19 were highly and aberrantly activated. For example, MDMs in COVID-19 lungs differentially expressed genes of activation (for example, CTSB, CTSD, CTSZ, PSAP) and two long non-coding RNAs, NEAT1 and MALAT1, that are associated with aberrant macrophage activation and impaired T cell immunity18 (Extended Data Fig. 5a, Supplementary Table 5)

Recent studies have shown that inflammation can induce a cell state that is characterized by failure to fully transition to AT1 cells; this has been termed ‘damage-associated transient progenitors’ (DATPs), ‘alveolar differentiation intermediate’ (ADI), or ‘pre-AT1 transitional cell state’ (PATS)

We used expression of the DATP marker genes (KRT8, CLDN4 and CDKN1A)25 to develop a DATP signature (see Methods; Extended Data Fig. 8e–h, Supplementary Table 8)

We identified five fibroblast subtypes: alveolar (n = 4,670), adventitial (n = 3,773), pathological (n = 2,322), intermediate pathological (n = 8,779), and other (n = 1,099) (Fig. 4b, Extended Data Fig. 12e). 


ST2: Cell type assignment.Lists of cell type quantifications and cell type marker genes for main cell type assignment, intermediate  cell  type  assignment,  and  fine  cell  type  assignment.  Differential  gene expression  is  reported  as  average  LogFC  (avg_logFC).  P  values  (p_val)  were  derived using  two-sided  Wilcoxon  rank-sum  test  and  adjusted  using  Bonferroni  correction (p_val_adj)

--> Nice. That is information ready for integration.


ST4: Gene signatures.Overview of all gene signatures and lists applied and generated in this study. Cytokine enrichmentsignatures are reported with their logFC (logfoldchange) and p value (p val) derived by two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test. ST5: Macrophages differential gene expression. Differential gene expression analysis among macrophage and monocyte populations in Covid-19 samples (n=19 donors profiled in 20 experiments) and controls (n=7 donors) with their average LogFC (avg_logFC). P values (p_val) were derived using two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test and adjusted using Bonferroni correction (p_val_adj). 


ST7: AT cells differential gene expression. Differential  gene  expression  analysis  of  alveolar  epithelial  cells  comparing  COVID-19 samples (n=19 donors profiled in 20 experiments) and controls (n=7 donors) for AT1 and AT2 cell types and differential gene expression between AT1 and AT2 cells in this study. Average LogFC (avg_logFC) is reported along with p values (p_val) derieved using two-sided  Wilcoxin  rank  sum  test.  Adjusted  p  values  (p_val_adj)  were  derived  using Bonferroni correction. 

ST8: Differential gene expression and signature DATP.Differential  gene  expression  between  AT1,  AT2  and  DATP  cells.  Average  LogFC (avg_logFC)  and  p  values(p_val)  were  calculated  using  two-sided  Wilcoxon  rank-sum test. Adjusted p values (p_val_adj) were derived using Bonferroni correction. Significantly upregulated   DATP   genes   (p_val_adj   <   0.05)   are   included   as   DATP   signature (our_datp_sig). Geneset enrichmentanalysis of the DATP signature genes with p value (p val), false discovery rate (fdr), significance (sig)and gene set overlap.

ST9: Fibroblast cluster marker annotation and differential gene expression.Cell  type  annotation  of  fibroblast  subtypes  and  differential  gene  expression  analysis. Average LogFC (avg_logFC) was calculated followed by p values(p_val) using two-sided Wilcoxon  rank-sum  test.  Adjusted  p  values  (p_val_adj)  were  derived  using  Bonferroni correction


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q107128138)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q107128138)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q107128138/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q107128138&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-021-03569-1)  
