
Diversity of developing peripheral glia revealed by single cell RNA sequencing
==============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q107332851]  
  
Publication date : 06 of December, 2020  

# Highlights

Here we used single cell RNA sequencing to profile and compare developing and mature glia from somatosensory lumbar dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and auditory spiral ganglia (SG). 

Despite their unique features, somatosensory and auditory GPs undergo convergent differentiation to generate myelinating and non-myelinating Schwann cells that are molecularly uniform. 

The major glial subtypes in the PNS are Schwann cells and satellite glia. Schwann cells surround the axons and have important roles in fast propagation of action potentials, metabolic and trophic support to neurons, debris clearance and axon regeneration after injury (Beirowski et al., 2014; Jessen and Mirsky, 2019; Monk et al., 2015; Nave, 2010; Nguyen et al., 2009). Myelinating and nonmyelinating Schwann cells, the two major subtypes of Schwann cells, wrap around axons forming myelin and Remak bundles

Satellite glia envelop the sensory neuron cell bodies.

e spiral ganglion (SG) communicate signals from the ear to the brain with high speed and precision

In addition to Schwann cells and satellite glia, the cochlea also houses a specialized population of glia-like supporting cells.

we used single cell sequencing to characterize developing peripheral glia and supporting cells from the SG and organ of Corti of the auditory system and from lumbar DRG and sciatic nerve (SN) of the somatosensory system.

Glia were defined by expression of Plp1, a proteolipid protein, which is expressed in all peripheral myelinating and non-myelinating glial cells and in supporting cells (Buchstaller et al., 2004; Gomez-Casati et al., 2010)

lp1+ glial populations were isolated from PLP-EGFPmice at E14, E18, and P14, stages extending from the time that cells derived from NCCs have coalesced to form ganglia (E14) to early differentiation (E18) and acquisition of mature differentiation state (P14), when satellite glia and Schwann cells are closely associated with neurons and their axons

To gain a comprehensive overview of the molecular relationships within this large population, we used the Conos algorithm (Barkas et al., 2019) to process the dataset collection. This approach allows us to overcome batch effects and establish correspondence between the cell subpopulations in different datasets.

nalysis identified 11 clusters of peripheral glia (Figure 1G). All clusters show expression of the peripheral glia marker Plp1, though expression is lower in cluster 8 than the other clusters


total of 29,307 cells, with 7,695 from the cochlea and 21,612 from lumbar DRGs+SN (F

Cluster identities were determined based on expression of known cell-cycle and glial genes

Sfrp5, which encodes a Wnt inhibitor, is one of the top genes highly expressed in DRG GPs compared to cochlear GPs (Figure 2E). Sfrp5 and other DRG GP-enriched genes are also (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted December 6, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.04.411975doi: bioRxiv preprint 
7highly expressed in DRG satellite glia (clusters g1 & g2)

Similarly, many genes distinctive for cochlear GPs, such as Gata2, Npy and Epha3, are shared with other cochlear specific clusters 

at E18, Npy is expressed in cochlear but not DRG glia. 

Consistent with the identification of cluster g3 as a cochlear cell type, differential gene expression analysis showed that genes highly expressed in cluster g3 compared to the rest of the cells include the gene set characteristic of cochlear GPs, including Gata2 and Npy

Thus, GPs in each ganglion produce immature Schwann cells that retain tissue-specific characteristics. 

Despite the fact that DRG and cochlear GPs are molecularly distinct, we found that NMSCs and MSCs from these two ganglia cluster together and are intermingled (Figures 4F, G). This suggests that even though Schwann cells arise from unique GPs and reside in different ganglia, their gene expression profile and function are remarkably uniform. 

Although Schwann cells from the cochlea and SN are similar at the molecular level, the proportion of MSCs and NMSCs is quite different in each tissue. 

In stark contrast to the uniformity between Schwann cells from the two ganglia, SG and DRG satellite glia diverge significantly beyond this core set of signature genes.  Although SG satellite glia can be recognized by the presence of known markers, Glul/GS and Kcnj10/Kir4.1 (Figures 5A, 5B), these genes are not restricted to satellite glia in the literature or in our dataset (Chen and Zhao, 2014; Hanani, 2005; Liu et al., 2014).

To identify a more selective marker for SG satellite glia, we performed differential gene expression analysis and identified Igfbp6 (Insulin Like Growth Factor Binding Protein 6) (Figure 5A).

Concordant with the lack of myelin-related factors in the DRG satellite glia, our data suggest that myelination is actively inhibited in DRG satellite glia

 DRG satellite glia, unlike SG satellite glia, express high levels of several genes reported to inhibit myelination including Ddit4, Ptprz1 and Ednrb (Figure 6C, D). 

 Conos analysis revealed that supporting cells are transcriptionally distinct from the other peripheral glia, yet still express many genes associated with the glial identity.

 Many of the characteristic glial genes expressed by supporting cells and by diverse satellite glia are also typically expressed by astrocytes, a major CNS glial cell type. This gene cohort includes Glast1, Kcnj10/Kir4.1, Glul, Erbb3, and S100b (Figure 7B), as well as several genes encoding proteins related to modulation of the ECM, such as the ECM degrading enzyme Adamts5 and the cell adhesion molecule F11r/JAM-A (Figure 7C) (

  In contrast, cochlear Schwann cells, which are transcriptionally indistinguishable from DRG Schwann cells, do not show high levels of Gata2expression. This raises the possibility that convergent development of Schwann cells involves downregulation of Gata2 and hence of the auditory identity.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q107332851)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q107332851)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q107332851/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q107332851&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.04.411975)  
