
Tutorial: guidelines for annotating single-cell transcriptomic maps using automated and manual methods
======================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q107158224]  
  
Publication date : 24 of May, 2021  

# Highlights

. Standard experimental protocols and analysis workflows have been developed to create single-cell transcriptomic maps from tissues. This tutorial focuses on how to interpret these data to identify cell types, states and other biologically relevant patterns with the objective of creating an annotated map of cells.

Basic familiarity with computer software is assumed,and basic knowledge of programming (e.g., in the R language) is recommended.

unannotated‘single-cell map’image (Box1)21. To interpret this map biolo-gically, it is necessary to determine which cell types or cell statesare represented by clusters or other patterns (e.g., gradients)observed in the data. These interpretations can then be labeledon the map, which helps place them in a conceptual frameworkuseful for better understanding tissue biology.

irst, automatic annotation uses a predefined set of‘marker genes’(i.e., genes that are specifically expressed in aknown cell type) or reference single-cell data (i.e., an existingexpertly annotated single-cell map) to identify and label indi-vidual cells or cell clusters by matching their gene expressionpatterns (signatures) to those of known cell types.


Automatic cell annotation is an efficient way to label cells or cellclusters using a computer algorithm and an appropriate set ofprior biological knowledge.

The  main  caveats  andrecommendations   for   automatic   cell   annotation   aresummarized in Table1.

o label individual cells, one of the most reliable marker-based annotation tools is semi-supervised category identifica-tion and assignment (SCINA)34. SCINA assumes that eachmarker follows a bimodal gene expression distribution, whereone peak corresponds to cells from the associated cell type, andthe other peak contains the rest of the cells in the experiment.
AUCell35is anothergood marker-based labeling method that classifies individualcells or clusters.

o label whole clusters, gene set variation analysis36(GSVA)has been benchmarked to be fast and reliable37. GSVA workssimilarly to AUCell: given a database of marker gene sets, itidentifies sets that are enriched in the gene expression profile ofa cluster. The GSVA software has the practical advantage that itcan annotate all clusters in one operation.

Reference-based cell annotation is based on the concept of‘guiltby association’

--> Not really good, IMHO

Marker-based annotationCell types not distinguishable by asingle marker
Use multiple markers for each cell typeKnown markers not distinguishingcell types

Curate larger lists of markers from the literature,additional experiments or experts

--> that is a task for - 3.1.  Cell-type markers in Wikidata
 and - 3.1.1. PanglaoDB

scmap41is one of the best performing tools for reference-based automatic cell or cluster annotation in terms of bothaccuracy of assigned labels and avoiding incorrect labeling ofnovel cell types33. Other tools for reference-based automaticannotation  include  SingleCellNet42and  SingleR43

Another approach to reference-based cell annotation is tointegrate a query data set with a reference data set using anintegration algorithm, enabling clusters to be identified thatspan both data sets (Box2). 


CINA assigns cell-typelabels to individual cells on the basis of the expression levels of the marker genes. SCINA was provided with the top 20 marker genes from eachpreviously annotated scRNA-seq cell cluster along with their associated cell type109(a) and literature-derived PBMC cell-type markers gathered byDiaz-Mejia et al.37(b).c, Sankey plot colored by the cell-type labels found inacompares the assigned cell-type labels between those from SCINAannotationsaandb. 

--> Differences are worrysome

For instance, distinguishing T cells from B cells isrelatively straightforward, but automatic tools sometimes can-not accurately distinguish CD8+cytotoxic T cells from naturalkiller cells (Fig.3). Thus, we recommend applying multiple,complementary annotation tools with multiple available markergene databases to a single data set.

--> Brute force recommendation, lol

Fig. 4 |Refining cluster labels from automatic annotation.Raw scmap-cluster41annotations provide every cluster with a unique label on thebasis of the identity assigned to most cells in each cluster. These labelscan be refined by aggregating identical labels, and label confidence canbe assessed by viewing the proportion of cell identities in each cluster(‘majority rule’).

Conflicting  annotations  within  a  cluster  may  reflectimportant information about that cluster, such as whetherit contains cell subtypes. However, if subtypes cannot beclearly defined, a more general cell-type annotation may bemore appropriate.

Manual annotationusually operates at the cluster level for convenience, but rarecells can be individually examined. Expert manual annotation istypically regarded as the gold-standard method for annotatingcells;  however,  it  is  slow  and  labor  intensive  and  canbe subjective.

--> It is a rather feeble gold standard, total 

If many marker genes for a known cell type are highly expressedacross cells in a cluster, this is often sufficient support for it tobe labeled as that cell type. Easy-to-use software such as the freeLoupe Cell Browser for 10x Genomics scRNA-seq data supportsthis visualization and analysis process

For instance, PanglaoDB23contains220 markers for B cells, and CellMarker24contains 1,426markers, yet only 66 are shared. If species-specific data arescarce, then data can be transferred by orthology from modelorganisms (Box3) or other models (e.g., in vitro cell culture ororganoids)

Sometimes the best reference single-cell map to use for cell annotation is from a different organism. To use such a reference for cell annotation,genes from the query organism must be mapped by orthology to genes from the reference, using databases such as Ensembl118or EggNOG119ortools such as OrthoFind.

Evolutionarily close reference species should be chosen; otherwise, integration may not be able to map similar cell types for annotation transfer.

Once  cell-type  information  from  known  markers  isexhausted, cells that have not been confidently annotated mustbe manually examined, cluster by cluster. Potential novelmarkers are identified by computing differential expressionbetween a cluster and all other cells

Ultimately, when annotating cell types, it is prudent to usestandard nomenclature, such as from the Cell Ontology, whichis a hierarchically organized controlled vocabulary of cell typesand subtypes59–61. This enables maps to be more easily inte-grated across studies.

--> Nice, a - 1.3.1.4. Cell Ontology (and CELDA) reference. It is impressive, though, that formal nomenclature is given but a small paragraph in the context of annotation. It is still not given enough importance...

When analyzing and characterizing novel cell types, it isimportant to determine whether they represent a stable cell typeor contain multiple cell states. The definitions of cell type andstate are not yet standardized, but a stable cell type may beexpected to have homogeneous gene expression across a clusterand be compact in a 2D projection plot (Box1), whereas cellgradients appear as a spread-out string of cells and cell states(e.g., cell cycle state) (Fig.6)

--> Why is that _that_ important?


Similarly, homogeneous or similar cell states or cell types areoften difficult to annotate because they share many of the samemarker genes (Fig.3

subtype-specific markers are hidden within or below the general T-cell signal.

To identify rare cell types, it may be necessary to use afeature selection tool that specifically identifies markers of rarecell types (e.g., GiniClust85) before clustering the cells. However,this can lead to overclustering of data sets that do not containrare cell types

We strongly recommendthat anyone working regularly with single-cell genomics datalearn programming. R programming is a good language to startwith, because of its prevalent use in single-cell genomics andease of use. This recommendation may change, because anincreasing  number  of  point-and-click  tools  are  beingdeveloped that package automated methods into easy-to-useworkflows90–92. A second recommendation is to use a powerfulcomputer with lots of memory (e.g., 128 GB of RAM), becausecurrent analysis and visualization methods load all data inmemory for processing.


Manual annotation should begin by identifying major well-known cell types, indicated by clearly defined, discrete cellclusters, because these are easiest to work with.

As afinal example, calculating differentiallyexpressed genes on a largely homogeneous sample will typicallyresult in a list of markers that are false positives or genes subjectprimarily to experimental or technical noise that are unrelatedto the actual biology.

We expect major improvements in automatic annotationbecause of rapidly growing reference atlases, improvements toresources like the Cell Ontology59and improved data setintegration algorithms.

--> Nice, Cell Ontology mentioned once more.

# Comments


## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q107158224)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q107158224)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q107158224/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q107158224&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41596-021-00534-0)  
