
Which methods are the most effective in enabling novice users to participate in ontology creation? A usability study
====================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q107338764]  
  
Publication date : 22 of June, 2021  

# Highlights

Thirty-three participants took part in a controlled experiment where they evaluated the four methods (Quick Form, Wizard, WebProtégé and Wikidata) after watching demonstration videos and completing a hands-on task. Another think-aloud study was conducted with three professional botanists. The efficiency effectiveness and user confidence in the methods are clearly revealed through statistical and content analyses of participants’ comments. Quick Form, Wizard and WebProtégé offer distinct strengths that would benefit our author-driven FAIR data generation system. Features preferred by the participants will guide the design of future iterations.

The complete prototype system (Figure 1) of author-driven computable data and ontology development consists of (i) an editor software application for authors to document their phenotypic characters by adding and using terms in ontologies; (ii) a semantic module that formats phenotypic characters as Resource Description Framework (RDF) named graphs and aggregates the graphs daily from different authors and for different taxa; (iii) an ontology Application Programming Interface (API) that updates the ontologies with authors’ input while working in the editor; (iv) an ontology scanner that scans and collects ‘conflicts’ in current ontologies; (v) a mobile application that presents conflicts for domain experts to vote on and resolve and (vi) term usage and provenance tracking modules that track and document all term usages and changes made to the ontology.

Wikidata is ‘a free and open knowledge base that can be read and edited by both humans and machines’ (Wikidata, 2021) (15). It ‘acts as central storage for the structured data of its Wikimedia sister projects, including Wikipedia’ (Wikidata main page) and many other projects not associated with the Wikimedia Foundation (Wikidata, 2021) (15). Because the underlying data model of Wikidata is RDF recommended by the W3C for the Semantic Web, many ontologies are also hosted in Wikidata as structured data. Because Wiki-based platforms have also been recognized as a useful platform for building community ontologies (16, 17, 18), we included Wikidata in this study.

Ontologies on Wikidata are presented as pages. Pages are all parallel to each other. This means, even though there may be pages of ontology A vs. pages of ontology B at the conceptual level, there are no structural or visual constructs on Wikidata that make such distinctions visible to a user. A page holds information for one term, which includes term ID, labels of the term in different languages and cross-references to other Wikimedia resources. Users can add an unlimited number of statements related to the term on a page (Figure 4). A statement consists of the term, a property and a value to the property, and it is a way to add RDF properties to a term. Wikidata differentiates entities (i.e. classes) and properties by giving them different initial letters in their IDs: IDs of entities start with Q, while IDs of properties start with P. For example, the property ‘part of’ has ‘P791’ as its property ID, and the term leaf-blade has an ID Q91238383 (Figure 4). Entities and properties are all defined by users and approved by the Wikidata editorial team. In this experiment, we used the sandbox version of Wikidata at https://test.wikidata.org/, which provides exactly the same functionality as the production site but without editorial control. Figure 4 is a screen capture of a term page in Wikidata. The demo used in the experiment that shows how to use Wikidata is found at https://youtu.be/5tGV7VzABv8.


--> Hm, sandbox Wikidata was used. That is actually a very limited set up. 


. A schematic representation of the experimental procedure is shown in Figure 7.

--> task is overfitted to ontology editors 

Our findings conform to some previous studies on the wizard-based user interface, Wikidata and WebProtégé. Babich (2017) suggested the guidance provided by wizards is a major strength, but advanced users may find them inflexible.

In a systematic review of 67 published research articles on Wikidata, Farda-Sarbas and Müller-Birn (25) pointed out that, although many studies on different aspects of Wikidata have been published due to the increasing popularity of the platform, little usability research for Wikidata has been done, especially on the learnability of Wikidata

Wikidata is a power knowledge base that supports cross-references among terms, but it is not an effective nor easy tool for authors to use.

--> Harsh, but good points to think about. 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q107338764)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q107338764)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q107338764/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q107338764&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/DATABASE/BAAB035)  
