
Single-cell RNA sequencing of blood antigen-presenting cells in severe COVID-19 reveals multi-process defects in antiviral immunity
===================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q108566454]  
  
Publication date : 01 of May, 2021  

# Highlights

COVID-19 can lead to life-threatening respiratory failure, with increased inflammatory mediators and viral load. Here, we perform single-cell RNA-sequencing to establish a high-resolution map of blood antigen-presenting cells (APCs) in 15 patients with moderate or severe COVID-19 pneumonia, at day 1 and day 4 post admission to intensive care unit or pulmonology department, as well as in 4 healthy donors

(1) increased pro-apoptotic pathways in plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs, key effectors of antiviral immunity), 

(2) a decrease of the innate sensors TLR9 and DHX36 in pDCs and CLEC9a+ DCs, respectively, 

(3) downregulation of antiviral interferon-stimulated genes  in  monocyte  subsets  and  

(4)  a  decrease  of  major  histocompatibility  complex  (MHC)  class  II-related  genes  and  MHC  
class II transactivator activity in cDC1c+ DCs, suggesting viral inhibition of antigen presentation. These novel mechanisms may explain patient aggravation and suggest strategies to restore the defective immune defence.

CD14 
enrichment
CD14+ cells
(monocytes)
CD14– cells Pan-DC 
enrichment

The accurate identification of all six APC populations was confirmed by the expression of canonical markers defining each subset (Extended Data Fig. 3d).

We further stratified a more exhaustive ISG signature according to their respective functions related to ‘antiviral’ and ‘regulators of IFN signalling’. Moderate APCs displayed higher levels of these two ISG families compared to both severe and HC groups (Fig. 3d,e). These results suggest a global perturbation of IFN downstream functions in severe COVID-19 APCs.




# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q108566454)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q108566454)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q108566454/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q108566454&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41556-021-00681-2)  
