
Multi-level ontology-based conceptual modeling
==============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q108926456]  
  
Publication date : 01 of May, 2017  

# Highlights

Since the late 1980s, there has been a growing interest in the use of foundational ontol- Q3
ogies to provide a sound theoretical basis for the discipline of conceptual modeling.

The ontology-based conceptual modeling language OntoUML, for example, incorporates
the distinctions underlying the taxonomy of types in the Unified Foundational Ontology
(UFO) (e.g., kinds, phases, roles, mixins, etc.). This approach has focused so far on the
support to types whose instances are individuals in the subject domain, with no provision
for types of types (or categories of categories).


Conceptual modeling is the activity of formally describing some aspects of the physical and social world around us for
the purposes of understanding and communication [1]. It is generally considered a fundamental activity in information
systems engineering [2], in which a given subject domain is described independently of specific implementation choices [3].
The main artifact of this activity is a conceptual model, i.e., a specification aiming at representing a conceptualization of the
subject domain of interest

--> Very nice wording 

(i) conceptual models are artifacts produced with the aim of representing a certain portion of reality according to a specific conceptualization; 
(ii) foundational ontologies describe the categories that are used for the development of these conceptualizations


human resource management, organizations are often staffed according to employee types (e.g. “Engineer”,
“Pilot”, “Secretary”). They may need to classify those employee types giving rise to types of employee types. In this case,
“Engineer” and “Pilot” could be considered as examples of “Technical Employee Type”, as opposed to “Secretary” which is an
example of “Administrative Employee Type”

entities of different (but nonetheless related) classification levels, such as
individual persons (“John”), employee types (“Engineer”, “Pilot”, “Secretary”), and types of employee types (“Technical Employee Type”, “Administrative Employee Type”).

The Unified Foundational Ontology (UFO) is a domain independent system of categories aggregating results from disciplines such as Analytical Philosophy, Cognitive Science, Philosophical Logics and Linguistics

UFO begins with a distinction between universals and individuals

--> Aristotelic in essence

Endurants (as opposed to events) are the individuals said to be wholly present whenever they are present, i.e., they can endure in time, suffering a
number of qualitatively changes while maintaining their identity (e.g., a house, a person)

Substantials are existentially independent endurants (e.g. a person, a forest). 
A moment, in contrast, is an endurant that inheres in, and, therefore, is existentially dependent of, another endurant(s). 
Moments that are dependent of one single individual are Intrinsic Moments (e.g. a person's age) whereas moments that depend on a plurality of individuals are instances of Relator (e.g. a marriage, an employment, an enrollment).

Intrinsic moments in UFO are further classified into: (i) those that are measurable and directly related to some quality
structure are termed Qualities (e.g. a car's weight has a measurable value in a one-dimensional structure of positive
numbers). In contrast, intrinsic moments not directly related to measure structures are termed Modes (e.g., a person's skills,
intentions, beliefs or symptoms).

instances of Mode Universals have modes as instances (e.g., “Disease” is instantiated by “John's diabetes”, “Mary's hemophilia”),

Substantial universals that carry a uniform principle of identity for their individuals are instances of Sortal
Universal (e.g., “Person”, “Car”, “Organization”). 
In contrast, instances of Mixin Universal (or Non-Sortal Universal) represent an abstraction of properties that are common to instances of various sortals (e.g., the mixin “Insurable Item” describes properties that are common to entities of different sortals such as “House”, “Car”, “Work of Art”).

In other words, if a universal T is rigid, then aninstance x of T cannot cease to be an instance of T without ceasing to exist (e.g., “Person”, “Organization”). 
In contrast, a universal is anti-rigid if its instances can move in and out of the extension of that universal without ceasing to exist (e.g.,
“Student”, “Insured Organization”).


A Rigid Sortal that supplies a principle of identity to its instances is termed Kind. 
Kind may be specialized by other rigid sortals that inherit the principle of identity supplied by the Kind. These rigid
sortals are termed Subkinds (e.g., “Man”, “Woman”)
Anti-rigid sortals are further classified into the categories Role or Phase
Instances of Role classify substantials through the relational properties they bear in the scope of a relational context (e.g.,
“Employee”, “Husband”, “Student”), and thus are considered externally dependent universals. In contrast, instances of Phase
classify substantials depending on one or more of their intrinsic properties (e.g., “Child” and “Adult”).

We employ a theory for multi-level modeling called MLT, which we introduced in [11]. Similarly to UFO, MLT distinguishes between types (universals) and individuals. However, differently from UFO, MLT also considers types that have other types as instances. In order to accommodate these varieties of types, the notion of type order is used in MLT. Types having individuals as instances are called first-order types, types whose instances are first-order types are called second-order types, and so on.

We call “Individual”, “1stOT” and “2ndOT” the basic types of MLT.

According to MLT, every possible entity must be instance of exactly one of its basic types.

Thus, all specializations of t’,
including t’ itself are instances of t. For example, consider a type called “Person Powertype” such that all possible specializations of “Person” are instances of it and, conversely, all its instances specialize “Person”. In this case, “Person Powertype”
is the power type of “Person”. Since “Person” is instance of “1stOT”, “Person Powertype” is instance of “2ndOT” and specializes “1stOT”

 One should notice that, in MLT, anything that is not an individual is a type of a given order. According to this definition of individual, we have that a
type is anything that can possibly have an instance. This definition of type conforms to the so-called Principle of Instantiation required for universals in the philosophical literature [16].





# Comments

## Tags
--> Core for - 1.2.2.1 Basis of conceptual modelling

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q108926456)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q108926456)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q108926456&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.DATAK.2017.03.002)  
