
The Turing Way: A Handbook for Reproducible Data Science
==========
  
  [@wikidata:Q108807256]  
  

# Highlights

### Research Data Management

Research Data Management (RDM) [def] covers how research data can be stored, described and reused. Data here is used as a generic term to encompass all digital objects.

"What is the information that I need to use and write about in my paper or book?”,
“What information would I need to back up my conclusions?” and 
“What information is needed by others to understand and possibly replicate the research that I have done?”. 


A Data Management Plan should provide information on five main topics:
1. Roles and Responsibilities
2. Type and size of data collected and documentation/metadata generated


A distinction can be made between different types of data that can be described in the plan separately:

- Raw/primary data
- Processed data
- Finalised data

3. Type of data storage used and back up procedures that are in place¶
Check if there are any costs associated with your project
- Preferred storage solution (during and after the project, see below)
- Personnel costs (if you need a data manager to manage more sensitive or large quantities of data)

4. Preservation of the research outputs after the project¶
You can outsource long term preservation of your data to a data repository

5. Reuse of your research outputs by others¶
Select a license when you make your output available on a repository (see the Licensing subchapters on data and software for more information). By selecting a license you tell others how they can reuse your data

It is much easier to make data FAIR if you plan to do this from the beginning of your research project.

Most institutions will provide a network drive that you can use to store data.

--> Hmm, kind of


Data Organisation Examples
Download this folder structure by Nikola Vukovic

You can pull/download folder structures using GitHub: This template by Barbara Vreede, based on cookiecutter, follows recommended practices for scientific computing by Wilson et al. (2017).

See this template by Chris Hartgerink for file organisation on the Open Science Framework.


You should have 2 or 3 copies of your files, stored on

at least 2 different storage media,

in different locations.

This can be part of your data management plan (DMP).

In the example of iris data, if some people use different terms to record information for a specific column - such as naming the column species instead of Species or using iris setosa, set. or i.setosa instead of setosa - the creation of a reproducible workflow will be more difficult, and errors may even be overlooked.

It is good practice to implement a data dictionary or a taxonomy of accepted terms and document the convention used in a README file.

A better solution, especially for long term storage, is to save all sheets separately in a CSV file and zip them together. 

Data is often collected manually, on paper. To be most efficient and avoid mistakes, it is best to collect the data in the same format as it will be digitalised. 

A good spreadsheet design has instructive and intuitive header names, and it facilitates both data collection and analysis. Building such a spreadsheet design is difficult as it takes time, multiple iterations, and consensus. 


Do not touch the raw data. Back it up somewhere reasonable and keep a read-only copy.

- Have a plan! Decide where your data is going to be stored, what it is called, when/if it needs to be deleted BEFORE you start collecting it and note it down in a data management plan. If you collect sensitive data, plan for consent for sharing from the start!

- Document everything. You know who the worst person at replying to emails is about what the sampling frequency of channel X was. Nope not him, it’s actually yourself from a year ago. Keep the documentation with the data!

- Create the data you want to see in the word. Imagine someone was about to give you a dataset that you needed to analyse well in order to get that job you have been dreaming about. What would you want it to look like? That is how yours should look.

- Try not to re-invent the wheel. Before you start creating some crazy new schema, storage format or naming protocol, have a quick google or ask your colleagues. Something that is already being used is likely to be better in the long run, even if you think there is a better solution.



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q108807256)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q108807256)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q108807256/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q108807256&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
