
Representing COVID-19 information in collaborative knowledge graphs: The case of Wikidata
=========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q108766311]  
  
Publication date : 28 of September, 2021  

# Highlights
The novelty of a bottom-up developed Knowledge Graph relies on an entirely organic growth of taxonomies and content, negotiated continuously by the involved parties. While the benefits of peer production and collaborative editing are well known, they are particularly visible in contemporary and fast changing topics

An important caveat is that data integration through Wikidata poses some particular challenges of its own, such as data licensing (being in the public domain, Wikidata can essentially only ingest public-domain data [76]) or multilinguality (e.g. how to handle concepts that are hard to translate [88]), and for certain kinds of data (e.g. health data from individual patients), it is not suitable, although appropriately configured instances of the underlying technology stack might [80].

For example, Wikidata has a concept for vaccine candidate [Q28051899], but as it is not on a particular Wikipedia page, the concept has never been represented on DBpedia.

Biomedical relations between Wikidata items can be assigned nature of statement [P5102] or sourcing circumstances [P1480] qualifiers to state the status (e.g. official, hypothesis and de facto) and the occurrence probability (e.g. rarely, possibly and often) of the described semantic relation.

 As of June 2, 2021, DBpedia counts less than 160.000 deaths in Brazil17 while both English Wikipedia and Wikidata present counts of over 460.000.18 This is mainly due to the long delays between the regular updates of the DBpedia statements from Wikipedia. In fact, as of June 2, 2021, DBpedia information for COVID-19 pandemic in Brazil is inferred from the edition of October 30, 2020,19 leaving it currently outdated.

 Further emphasising the multidisciplinary nature of Wikidata, there are also significant social aspects of the pandemic contained in the knowledge base

Because Wikidata is agnostic to the exact type of research output, its structure is equally suited to representing information on research publications, preprints (Fig. S5), clinical trials (Fig. S6) or computer applications (Fig. S7). 

In this research paper, we demonstrate the ability of open and collaborative knowledge graphs such as Wikidata to represent and integrate multidisciplinary COVID-19 information and the use of SPARQL to generate summary visualizations about the infectious disease, the underlying pathogen, the resulting pandemic and related topics. 



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q108766311)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q108766311)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q108766311&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3233/SW-210444)  
 * [Full text URL](https://content.iospress.com/download/semantic-web/sw210444?id=semantic-web%2Fsw210444)  
