
Cells of the human intestinal tract mapped across space and time
================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q108544696]  
  
Publication date : 08 of September, 2021  

# Highlights

BEST4 epithelial cells, which have been previously observed in 
human small and large intestines6,12,13, varied in abundance between 
intestinal regions (Fig. 1c, d). Using differential cell-type abundance 
analysis14, we identified their region-specific expression signatures 
(Fig. 1e, Extended Data Fig. 3a–d). Notably, small-intestinal BEST4 cells 
were marked by high expression of the gene CFTR, which encodes a 
chloride channel and is mutated in cystic fibrosis (Fig. 1e); such high 
expression was also observed at the protein level (Extended Data 
Fig. 3e). In this staining and in previous work, BEST4 cells were in 
close proximity to cells that resembled goblet cells12 (Extended Data 
Fig. 3f ). Our analysis highlights a possible role of BEST4 enterocytes 
of the small intestine in aiding mucus production by goblet cells 
and biosynthesis of acids, in contrast to the functions of colonic 
BEST4 cells in the metabolism of small molecules (Extended Data  
Figs. 3g, 4a, b).

 Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) of fetal (a) and postnatal  
(b) epithelial cell types. Key cell types are circled with a dashed line and arrows 
depict paths of differentiation towards secretory and absorptive enterocytes 
as determined by scVelo.

Here we present an integrated dataset of more than 428,000 single 
cells from multiple anatomical regions of the human gut throughout 
life. This dataset can be browsed at https://gutcellatlas.org.

In early development, 
ENCCs differentiated primarily to neurons via neuroblasts, giving rise 
to two distinct branches: branch A (ETV1) and branch B (BNC2) (Fig. 3a, 
Extended Data Figs. 8c, 9a–d), as has been observed in mice22. At this 
stage, branch A further differentiated to inhibitory motor neurons 
(iMN, resembling ENC8–ENC922) and two subsets that had character-
istics of intrinsic primary afferent neurons (IPANs) or interneurons 
(resembling ENC1222

Three  types  of  enteric  
neural and a subset of differentiating glia (COL20A1) were present 
at 12–17 PCW (Fig. 3b, Extended Data Fig. 9a–d). Colonic glia 1 cells 
expressed posterior HOX genes and TFAP2B, which suggests that 
they originated in the sacrum or trunk (Extended Data Fig. 8g). 

Here we identify cell types in the developing intestines that have transcrip-
tional signatures and signalling pathways matching LTi, mLTo and eLTo 
(LEC2) cells. In vitro studies have shown the ability of RORC-expressing 
CD56+CD127+IL17A+ cells42 and ILC3s43 to activate mesenchymal cells. 
This leads us to propose that all three LTi-like subsets defined in this 
study act in the initiation of secondary lymphoid organs, but probably 
at different stages of the process.

Overall, our work provides clarity on the complex interplay between 
intestinal cell types throughout time and space, and has potential impli-
cations for disease and for the engineering of in vitro systems.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q108544696)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q108544696)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q108544696/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q108544696&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-021-03852-1)  
