
Octet: Online Catalog Taxonomy Enrichment with Self-Supervision
===============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q108928585]  
  
Publication date : 18 of June, 2020  

# Highlights
Despite the prevalent use of online catalog taxonomies, most of them in practice are maintained by humans, which is labor-intensive and
difficult to scale. While taxonomy construction from scratch is considerably studied in the literature, how to effectively enrich existing
incomplete taxonomies remains an open yet important research question.

In this paper, we present a self-supervised end-to-end framework, Octet, for Online Catalog Taxonomy EnrichmenT.

We propose to distantly train a sequence labeling model for term extraction and employ graph neural networks (GNNs) to capture the
taxonomy structure as well as the query-item-taxonomy interactions for term attachment.

Taxonomies as a building block of e-commerce websites (e.g., Amazon.com) and
business directory services (e.g., Yelp.com) for both customer-facing
and internal applications, such as query understanding, item categorization [18], browsing, recommendation [9], and search [33].

First, it is implausible to extract terms with heuristic
approaches [13] from item titles and descriptions, since vendors
can write them in arbitrary ways. Second, it is highly unlikely to
find co-occurrences of hypernym pairs in the item titles due to
their conciseness, making Hearst patterns [8, 21]

For instance, one may often see
“US” and “Seattle” in the same document, but barely see “Beverages”
and “Coffee” in the same item title

To tackle the above issues of taxonomy construction from scratch,
we target the taxonomy enrichment problem, which discovers emerging concepts1
and attaches them to the existing taxonomy (named
core taxonomy) 


Despite the challenges, a unique opportunity for online catalog
taxonomy enrichment is the availability of rich user behavior logs

--> I wonder if similar user-behaviour logs are available for the Wikipedia systems, probably not
Octet leverages heterogeneous
sources of signals; it captures the lexical semantics of the terms and
employs Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to model the structure of
the core taxonomy as well as the query-item-taxonomy interactions in
user behavior.


Octet doubles
the size (2,163 to 4,355 terms) of an online catalog taxonomy in
production with 0.881 precision.

Figure 2: An overview of the proposed framework Octet. Item profiles and user queries in the target domain serve as framework input and the core taxonomy is used as self-supervision. New terms are automatically extracted via sequence labeling.
Heterogeneous sources of signals, including the structure of the core taxonomy, the query-item-taxonomy interactions, and
the lexical semantics of the term pairs are leveraged for hypernymy detection during term attachment.

--> Very clear, nice. 

Octet consists of two inter-dependent stages: term extraction
and term attachment, which, in a nutshell, solves the problem
of “which terms to attach” and “where to attach”, respectively.

Fig. 2 shows an overview of Octet. At a high level, we regard
term extraction as a sequence labeling task and employ a sequence
labeling model with distant supervision from V to extract new
terms V
′
Term extraction extends T = (V, R) with new terms V`.

For example, item “Golden State Fruit Pears to Compare Deluxe
Gift” with associated taxonomy node “Pears” will be labeled as "O
O O B O O O O" for model learning. This approach has several advantages. First, unlike unsupervised term extraction methods [13],
we train a sequence labeling model to ensure that only the terms
in the same domain as the existing terms V are extracted

Therefore, we can naturally regard term attachment as
a multi-class classification problem 

For example, one
may not have enough knowledge of node v = “Makgeolli” (Korean
rice wine); but if she perceives that “Sake” (Japanese rice wine) isv’s
sibling and “Wine” is v’s parent, she would have more confidence
in considering “Makgeolli” as one type of “Alcoholic Beverages”

For online catalog taxonomies, we also find
many cases where lexical similarity provides strong signals for
hypernymy identification. For example, “Black Tea” is a hyponym
of “Tea” and “Fresh Packaged Green Peppers” is a sibling of “Fresh
Packaged Orange Peppers”. Therefore, we take the following lexical
features [17] to measure the lexical relationship between term pairs:
Ends with, Contains, Suffix match, Longest common substring, Length
difference, and Edit distance. 

Detailed statistics of the datasets can
be found in Table 3. Note that if we regard term attachment as a
classification problem, each class would have very few training
samples (e.g., 1193 / 298 ≈ 4 in Amazon Grocery & Gourmet Food),
which calls for a significant level of model generalizability.


For the wrongly attached terms, Octet is unconfident in
distinguishing “Russet Potatoes” from “Fingerling & Baby Potatoes”,
which is undoubtfully a harder case and requires deeper semantic
understanding. Octet also detects a potential error in the core
taxonomy itself as we found the siblings of “Pinto Beans” all start
with “Dried”, which might have confused Octet during training.

Octet employs a sequence labeling model designed for
term extraction from online domains with self-supervision.

In this paper, we present a self-supervised end-to-end framework for
online catalog taxonomy enrichment that considers heterogeneous
sources of representation and does not involve additional human
effort other than the existing core taxonomies to be enriched.



## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q108928585)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q108928585)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q108928585&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486.3403274)  
 * [Full text URL](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2006.10276.pdf)  
