
Type or Individual? Evidence of Large-Scale Conceptual Disarray in Wikidata
===========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q109990743]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2021  

# Highlights
We show evidence of a large number of modeling mistakes associated with the
failure to employ this distinction in the Wikidata knowledge graph, which can
be identified with the incorrect use of instantiation, which is a relation between
an individual and a type, and specialization (or subtyping), which is a relation
between two types.


While we seem to be able to grasp
this distinction intuitively, the boundaries between types and individuals are not always
sharply drawn in everyday discourse. (...) When we say “they
drive the same car”, do we mean the same type of car of the same individual car?

An individual car has a license plate and a production date, while a car model (a type) can be characterized by the tag sales price, the
available colors, etc.

An instance of car model can specialize another type of car, in the way that “Porsche
Speedster 23F” specializes “Four-Wheeled Car”. An instance of individual car can instantiate “Porsche Speedster 23F”, in the way that James Dean’s Porsche did.

Wikidata also allows the declaration of classes of classes (or metaclasses). For example, terrestrial planet is instance of the class
astronomical object type (Q17444909), whose instances are specializations
of astronomical object (Q6999).

The fragment involving the French language identified in the previous section is an instance of a recurring pattern involving instantiation and specialization originally identified in [2]. More precisely, it is an occurrence of an anti-pattern, since it is a recurrent
error-prone structure.

To assess the occurrence of the anti-pattern, we have executed SPARQL queries in
the filtered dump. Listing 1.1 shows the SPARQL query used to find AP1 occurrences considering transitiveness for subclass of statements.

SELECT DISTINCT ?subject ?class WHERE {
?subject wdt:P31 ?class .
?subject wdt:P279+ ?class .
}

There is a clear overlap of subdomains in the ranking, especially but not limited
to entities related to biology and biochemistry


to a particular gene type repeatable in chromosomes of every cell (gene instances,
i.e., particular biochemical structures composed of particular nucleotides) but also to
the representation of a gene type (a data object) that results from genome sequencing operations

-->   - 2.1. The concept of "gene"

How
should instances of TP53 be interpreted then, as they are also instances of gene like
TP53 itself? We hypothesize that the subclassing statement is incorrect. TP53 is not a
subclass, but an instance of the protein-coding gene subclass of gene.

--> I disagree. The instance of statement seems incorrect. there should be two entities: "gene" and "gene type"

The same observation can be made for the other entities in the ranking related to biology and biochemistry such as: protein, pseudogene,
non-coding RNA, and cellular component. These are all second-order types whose instances are first-order types classifying individual entities not recorded in the platform.


Hence, there is a mismatch between ontological considerations (TP53 is a class instantiated by structures inside individual cells) and knowledge representation considerations (instances of TP53 are never recorded in Wikidata, suggesting it to be an individual).

The case of biological process (Q2996394) also reveals confusion regarding
the entity’s order. It is a subclass of process (Q3249551), which in turn is a subclass
of occurrence (Q1190554), the latter described as “occurrence of a fact or object in
space-time”.

--> Should be a subclass of occurrent. 

In this section, we illustrate that by implementing such a procedure for the case of
AP1 as a web application termed the Wikidata Anti-Pattern Analyzer3
(WAPA).

Available at https://atilioa.github.io/WikidataAntiPatternAnalyzer/.

--> Nice little tool!

By conducting a conceptual analysis of these cases,
we manage to venture an explanation for their occurrence, and propose interpretation
solutions that would eliminate them. (Due to space limitations, the analysis conducted
in Section 4 was limited to a subset of the top-ranking notions.)


Since then, to support stratified taxonomies, the platform includes at the top of its specialization hierarchy a set of classes representing different orders, namely first-order class (Q104086571), second-order
class (Q24017414), third-order class (Q24017465), fourth-order class
(Q24027474), fifth-order class (Q24027515), and fixed order metaclass
of higher order (Q24027526). These classes are declared as equivalent to their
counterparts in the OpenCyc ontology [5]. However, they are underused in the platform,
and, as we show here and in [4], their mere inclusion in the platform without adequate
computational aid has been insufficient to prevent the introduction of anti-patterns in
new revisions

. One of the one of the patterns
detected in (ii), however, is what the authors call metonymy, which is a conflict arising
from disjoint but related interpretations of the same concept.

Moreover, they seem to have a somewhat lenient approach with respect
to these problems: “[t]he metonymy anti-pattern is difficult to resolve, because it is due
to ambiguities that seem widespread in human language. Metonymy seems related to
human propensity for an economy of means... [we try] to accommodate this ‘power of
ambiguity”’. We take here a radically different approach in this respect by advocating
that these problems can cause logical contradictions and conceptual confusion, and by
proposing concrete means to detect and correct them.

--> radical indeed
# Comments

Super well written. 

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q109990743)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q109990743)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q109990743&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-89022-3_29)  
