
Dynamic visualisation of million-tip trees: the OneZoom project (preprint)
==========
  
  [@wikidata:Q110155392]  
  

# Highlights

2. Our approach is to automate data processing, synthesise data from a wide range of
available sources, then to feed these data to a client-side visualisation engine in
parts.

The underlying methods developed have applications that transcend tree of life
visualisation. 
For the whole complete tree, we describe automated ID mappings
between well known resources without resorting to taxonomic name resolution,
automated methods to collate sets of public domain representative images for higher
taxa, and an index to measure public interest of individual species. 


After ten years of work, our tree of life explorer is now broadly complete, it has
attracted nearly 1.5 million online users, and is backed by a novel long-term
sustainability plan

Our software provides automated methods to embellish the tree with essential metadata: not
only scientific and vernacular names (in multiple languages), but also images, extinction risk
(IUCN 2020), and links to online resources such as Wikipedia, the Encyclopedia of Life (Parr
et al. 2014), NCBI/GenBank (NCBI Resource Coordinators 2018) and GBIF (GBIF 2021).

The source code to our visualizer and associated server software is freely downloadable
from https://github.com/OneZoom/ and the version 3.5 ‘Chocolate chip starfish’ to
accompany this manuscript is also available in a Docker container (OneZoom Core Team
2021b)

We use the most recent available "synthetic tree" from the OpenTree project as our core
data source, trimming the data before final output to remove divisions below the species
level

Historically, the scientific name serves this function, but it
becomes problematic for whole-life datasets (Page 2008): not only can plants and animals
share identical names (e.g. Ficus variegata), but even within kingdoms, taxa at levels above
the family are not required to be unique. Moreover names are subject to extensive synonymy
and misspelling. As our project relies substantially on the OpenTree phylogeny, we use the
"Open Tree Taxonomy" (OTT) ID as our canonical taxon identifier

Reliable mapping to Encyclopedia of Life (EOL) UIDs a

All species on the OneZoom tree have a "popularity" index, which is used internally in our
sponsorship-based funding model (...). 
The popularity of a species is based on sizes and recent views of pages on
Wikipedia. (...) 
Our mapping from OTT ID to Wikidata item (or ‘Q’) ID, can be used to identify
titles for taxon pages on Wikipedia; Wikimedia dump files can then be searched for statistics
associated with these page titles


In particular, we use the wikidata QID to access wikipedia pages in multiple languages for over
1.3 million taxa on the tree. This allows the standard front end to display appropriate
wikipedia information in a tabbed window within our ToL explorer

The view flexibility has in turn enabled third party projects to restyle
the tree to fit their own needs. Notably, this includes the One Tree One Planet project
(https://www.onetreeoneplanet.org) a digital artwork by the artist Naziha Mestaoui in
collaboration with scientists at the Florida Museum of Natural History, aimed at encouraging
individuals to take personal actions for biodiversity and conservation. 

Sponsors commonly choose
species of personal significance, or sponsor as a gift to others

Finally, to engage non-experts, we wish to create
a framework for creating engaging "tours" around the tree of life, generated by users and
volunteers. These would involve zooming between a series of locations around the tree,
each location featuring additional audio, video, or text-based content. We envisage this as a
new approach to engage the public in biodiversity, conservation and evolution, within the
context of a complete phylogeny of life.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q110155392)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q110155392)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q110155392&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
