
Biolink Model: A Universal Schema for Knowledge Graphs in Clinical, Biomedical, and Translational Science
=========================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q111416341]  
  
Publication date : 25 of March, 2022  

# Highlights
 Data set heterogeneity and complexity; the proliferation of ad hoc data formats; poor compliance with guidelines on findability, accessibility, interoperability, and reusability; and, in particular, the lack of a universally-accepted, open-access model for standardization across biomedical KGs has left the task of reconciling data sources to
downstream consumers.

The term ‘knowledge graph’ (KG) is gaining popularity and is generally used to encompass a range of graphoriented representation frameworks, including Resource Description Framework (RDF) triple stores and
labeled property-graph databases such as Neo4j.

Examples of general-domain KGs include the Google
Knowledge Graph and Wikidata3. Within the biomedical sciences, examples include SemMedDB4, Hetionet 5, Implicitome6, Monarch Initiative7, the biological subset of Wikidata8, SPOKE9, and KGCOVID-1910. 

Several ontologies and schemas for representing biomedical knowledge are available.

For example, the Semantic Science Integrated Ontology (SIO)17 is used for representing scientific data and knowledge. 

Biolink Model is composed of several modeling elements, including a hierarchy of defined Classes,
Properties (with defined Types), Predicates, Mixins, and Associations (Table 1).

Biolink Model aims to address several challenges that obstruct the interoperability between KGs,
including: 1) the need for expertise to transform data between tabular, RDF, and graphical models; 2)
sparse and/or inconsistent application of ontologies or other controlled vocabularies, as well as
differences in the identifiers that are used for storing instances of nodes within a graph; and 3) the lack
of a standard approach to model the intersection of ontological domains (e.g., the relationships
between genes and diseases). 

Using the framework provided by the Linked data Modeling Language (LinkML), Biolink Model is
distributed in a variety of formats, including YAML, JSON-Schema, SQL-DDL, Python/Java classes,
and RDF

, Biolink Model Association elements are equivalent to Axioms, and in RDF, they are equivalent to Statements
(rdf:Statement).

. Because of the hierarchical structure of the Biolink model, the use of
biolink:related_to also will return more specific predicates such as biolink:negatively_regulates and
biolink:positively_regulates.

Because Biolink Model is platform-agnostic, open-source, and publicly accessible, and because it can
be translated into a variety of data modeling formats, it encourages people from different backgrounds
and with different expertise to work together to evolve the model.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q111416341)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q111416341)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q111416341&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [Full text URL](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2203.13906.pdf)  
 * [arXiv ID](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2203.13906.pdf)  
