
Human distal lung maps and lineage hierarchies reveal a bipotent progenitor
===========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q111524386]  
  
Publication date : 30 of March, 2022  

# Highlights

. We lack a comprehensive map of human distal airways, including the terminal and respiratory bronchioles (TRBs), which are implicated in respiratory diseases1,2,3,4. Here, using spatial transcriptomics and single-cell profiling of microdissected distal airways, we identify molecularly distinct TRB cell types that have not—to our knowledge—been previously characterized.

AT0 cells and TRB-SCs are conserved in primates and emerge dynamically during human lung development. Using a non-human primate model of lung injury, together with human organoids and tissue specimens, we show that alveolar type-2 cells in regenerating lungs transiently acquire an AT0 state from which they can differentiate into either alveolar type-1 cells or TRB-SCs

The cellular composition of human TRBs remains elusive. TRBs are located at the junction between airways and alveoli and constitute a transition zone that is thought to be critically involved in many respiratory diseases, including idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)

we performed spatial transcriptomic (ST) profiling of lung sections using Visium technology 

Some of the cell types belonging to the SFTPB+ population and located in TRBs are absent from healthy human lung scRNA-seq data from previous studies12,23 (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 3e, f). Together, these data identify region-specific markers and cell types that have not to our knowledge been previously characterized in human airways.

We identified 18 distinct epithelial cell clusters that segregated into two distinct populations based on the presence or absence of SFTPB expression. We refer to these as SFTPB− and SFTPB+ populations (Fig. 1b, Extended Data Fig. 2b). 


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q111524386)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q111524386)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q111524386&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-022-04541-3)  
