
Querying knowledge graphs in natural language
=============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q111308059]  
  
Publication date : 06 of January, 2021  

# Highlights

--> code at https://github.com/Sylvia-Liang/QAsparql

In this paper we propose a new QA system for translating natural language questions into SPARQL queries. The key idea is to break up the translation process into 5 smaller, more manageable sub-tasks and use ensemble machine learning methods as well as Tree-LSTM-based neural network models to automatically learn and translate a natural language question into a SPARQL query. The performance of our proposed QA system is empirically evaluated using the two renowned benchmarks-the 7th Question Answering over Linked Data Challenge (QALD-7) 

The basic idea is to break up the task of translation from natural language to SPARQL in the following components: (1) Question analysis, i.e. syntactic parsing. (2) Question type classification, i.e. is it a yes/no questions or a count question? (3) Phrase mapping, i.e. mapping of entities and relationships in the natural language to the corresponding entities and relationships in the knowledge graph. (4) Query generation, i.e. construct a SPARQL query based on the entities and relationships identified in the knowledge graph. (5) Query ranking, i.e. rank the most relevant query as the highest. Details are discussed in "Methods" section.


 Translating from natural language to SPARQL is a hard problem due to the ambiguity of the natural language. For instance, the word “Zurich” could refer to the city of Zurich, the canton of Zurich or the company “Zurich Financial Services”

WDAqua uses a rule-based combinatorial approach which constructs SPARQL queries based on the semantics encoded in the underlying knowledge base. As a result, WDAqua does not use a machine learning algorithm to translate natural language questions into SPARQL queries. 

TagMe is a tool that on-the-fly identifies meaningful substrings in an unstructured text and links each of them to a pertinent Wikipedia page in an efficient and effective way [30]. TagMe shows good performance especially when annotating texts that are short and poorly composed. This feature of TagMe makes it ideal for question answering tasks. Moreover, TagMe was shown to achieve the best performance on the LC-QuAD dataset among all the available tools used for entity mapping tasks [7].

There is an intrinsic tree-like structure in both SPARQL queries and natural language questions. We adopt the basic assumption that the syntactic similarity between between the queries and the input question can be used for ranking. 

We measure the similarity between candidate queries and the input question based on Tree-LSTM [12]. Standard LSTM operates on a sequential order of the input. Tree-LSTMs take into account the tree representation. 

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q111308059)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q111308059)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q111308059&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/S40537-020-00383-W)  
