
Expressing High-Level Scientific Claims with Formal Semantics
=============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q111482929]  
  
Publication date : 02 of December, 2021  

# Highlights
The core claims or hypotheses of scientific work have only been covered in a shallow manner, such as by linking mentioned entities to established identifiers. In this research, we therefore want to find out whether we can use existing semantic formalisms to fully express the content of high-level scientific claims using formal semantics in a systematic way.

We successfully applied this super-pattern to an enlarged sample of scientific claims. We show that knowledge representation experts, when instructed to independently instantiate the super-pattern with given scientific claims, show a high degree of consistency and convergence given the complexity of the task and the subject. 

On the other hand, thereare Artificial Intelligence tools that can identify plagiarism and
predict the impact an article might have [10], to natural language processing techniques that make use of strategies such as entity
extraction to identify concepts and ideas in articles, assisted and curated by humans [20].

The Open Research Knowledge Graph [16] is another initiative that aims to make research articles machine-readable


The super-pattern is a template with five slots, which are to be filled
in when it is instantiated. It has the following structure with five
elements with expected types in square brackets:
• Context class (“in the context of all ...”): [class identifier]
• Subject class (“things of type ...”): [class identifier]
• Qualifier (e.g. “mostly”): [qualifier from closed list]
• Relation type (“have a relation of type ...”): [relation type
from closed list]
• Object class (“to things of type ... that are in the same context”): [class identifier]


In the context of all persons, things of type obesity
together with metabolic abnormality frequently have a
relation of type co-occurs with to things of type knee
osteoarthritis that are in the same context (i.e. the
same person).


We can also phrase the 𝑃 (. . . | . . .) part as a matter of ratios
instead of probabilities: It is the ratio of things that satisfy the lefthand side out of all the things that satisfy the right-hand side. This
can be defined as such in higher-order logic, but we chose here the
notationally simpler expression with conditional probabilities.


Step 1: select articles. We selected a set of 50 random scientific
articles by creating random numbers and then consulting Semantic
Scholar4
to retrieve the article with that number as Semantic Scholar
corpus ID

we ran a formalization study where such experts independently perform super-pattern
based formalization

After Stage 2 (before the joint discussion), 38% of the individual formalizations were marked as containing a mistake by at least one of
the experts. This dropped to just 6% after the discussion, showing agreement being increased by the discussion.

We can then imagine countless novel applications, such as overarching aggregations, finding supporting or
conflicting claims, answering high-level questions, making visualization of scientific knowledge, and much more. In summary, it
would allow us to harness computers in a more effective way to
increase our understanding of scientific discoveries and thereby
amplify their impact.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q111482929)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q111482929)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q111482929&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1145/3460210.3493561)  
