
The Semanticscience Integrated Ontology (SIO) for biomedical research and knowledge discovery
=============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q19671659]  

# Highlights

SIO features a simple upper level comprised of essential types and relations for the rich description of arbitrary (real, hypothesized, virtual, fictional) objects, processes and their attributes

There is a real and urgent need to explore effective methods for biomedical data integration and knowledge management [1,2]. Semantic-based techno- logies, such as ontologies, offer a proven method to exploit expert-based knowledge in the analysis of large datasets through terminological reasoning such as correspondence, classification, query answering and consistency checking.

With dozens of high value datasets now available in RDF and hundreds of biological ontologies expressed using OWL, there is a tantalizing opportunity to use these resources in knowledge discov- ery. Biomedical.

As of November 2013, SIO (v1.0) is implemented as an OWL-DL ontology (SRIQ(D) expressivity).

SIO adheres to a three-dimensional worldview that is familiar to most scientists – one that distinguishes be- tween processes and the objects that participate in them. An ‘object’ is an ‘entity’ that occupies space and is fully identifiable by its characteristics at any moment in time in which it exists. A ‘process’ is an ‘entity’ that unfolds in time and has temporal parts. While an entity ‘exists at’ and ‘is located in’ some space and time (Figure 2B), these need not be real space or real time, but may instead occur in a hypothetical (propositional), virtual (electronic), or fictional (creative work) setting. A ‘quality’ (intrinsic attribute), ‘capability’ (action specification) or ‘role’ (be- havior, right and obligation) may exist at some time in the entity that bears it, but it ‘is realized in’ a process in which it plays a critical role (Figure 2A). The value of an informational entity such as a ‘measurement value’ (‘quantity’ or ‘position’) is represented as a literal - string, number (integer, float, double), boolean or date - using the ‘has value’ data property (Figure 2C).

--> I like this notion of an object as something that occupies space. 

Figure 4 Exact description of a molecule of methane using mereotopological relations in equivalent class axioms

--> Very nice axiomatization.

In this usecase, we describe thevarious parts and relationships within a scientific investigation. A sci- entific ‘experiment’ (Figure 9) is a ‘procedure’ that aims to support, dispute or refute a well formulated ‘hypothesis’ by ‘analysis’ of ‘data’ obtained through ‘observation’ and/or ‘measurement’.

--> There are people that would cringe with so many quotation marks. They are totally necessary, though. 

Nanopublications have been used in enabling publication of genetic data. To accommodate computed associations, we extended SIO with ‘association’ and more specific types including ‘gene-disease association’.

SIO has emerged to support the demands of the bioinformatics community, with a special emphasis on biological knowledge represen- tation as well as ontology, data and service interoperability.
Availability

# Comments

Project link redirects to https://github.com/MaastrichtU-IDS/semanticscience

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q19671659)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q19671659)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q19671659/P921%3BP4510)  
