
Ontology Design Patterns for bio-ontologies: a case study on the Cell Cycle Ontology
====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q21093639]  

# Highlights
The richness in bio-ontologies is a prior condition for diverse and efficient reasoning, and hence querying and hypothesis validation. Rigour allows a more consistent maintenance. Modelling such bio-ontologies is, however, a difficult task for bio-ontologists, because the necessary richness and rigour is difficult to achieve without extensive training

Ontology Design Patterns provide a method for rich and rigorous modelling in bio- ontologies. They


Pres- ently, however, bio-ontologies mainly tend to be lean, as opposed to rich, due to the gap between the potential of KR techniques and their actual implementation in bio- ontologies. Most bio-ontologies do not come close to using all the expressiveness of the selected KR language [6], even if that language has limitations in its ability to fully describe the biological domain knowledge [7]


Another problem with current bio-ontologies is the lack of rigour (use of strict, explicit and well defined seman- tics). Rigour ensures a sound structure and hence a more robust development and maintenance over time. Despite efforts to improve the rigour of some bio-ontologies [8- 10], rigorous modelling is not general practice within bio- ontologies.

tension between modelling best practice and modelling skills [11] is a fundamental barrier for progress in bio-ontologies, as the bio-ontologists only rarely use the whole power of KR languages.


ODPs are solutions to modelling problems that help the bio-ontologist to better use the expressivity and rigour of the KR language of choice.

Another method of applying ODPs is to use condition matching. The Ontology Processing Language (OPL) is a syntax that allows conditions to be defined for matching classes in an ontology written in OWL. The classes matched have transformations applied on them that change axioms or annotation values. Thus OPL can be used to create ODPs in an ontology, by defining and ODP as the changes to be made when a match happens

Some attempts have been made to provide best practice guidelines in ontology engineering and KR, which in some cases are semantically equivalent to ODPs. Some of those efforts have been collected (albeit not as a systema- tized collection) in the W3C Semantic Web Best Practices and Deployment Working Group web [67]

The use of ODPs will most likely give several advantages to bio-ontologists when creating and maintaining bio- ontologies. The following advantages have not been thoroughly tested, and therefore there is not experimental evidence for them, but they are reasonable assumptions based in the authors' experience in bio-ontology engineer- ing. The advantages are divided in three areas:
1. Design (semantics, modelling)
2. Implementation (actual development of the ontology)
3. Communication


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q21093639)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q21093639)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q21093639/P921%3BP4510)  
