
Will a biological database be different from a biological journal?
==================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q21092584]  

# Highlights

As both Editor-in-Chief of PLoS Computational Biology and Codirector of the Protein Data Bank (PDB), one of the oldest and widely used data resources in molecular biology, the question is particularly pertinent. Here, I give my perspective on what could and, I believe, should happen in the future.

Not only are the daily operations of databases and journals
similar, but the business models also have parallels (I will not dwell on them here though). Certainly from a consumer’s perspective, in terms of accessibility, there is no difference between a paper in a PLoS journal and an entry in the PDB database—they are freely available to all.

Clearly, no one perceives a database entry of, say, a sequence, or a specimen in a museum collection, as being as valuable as the journal paper that describes it. But, ironically, to the consumer, at least by one measure, the database entry may indeed be more valuable. The structure of human deoxyhemoglobin is one of the most downloaded structures in the PDB—in one year, it has been downloaded more times than the original paper has ever been cited thus far. Yet from the authors’ perspective, the Nobel Prize does not come from constructing the PDB database entry, but from an eloquent description of the relationship between structure and function that was presented most completely in the literature.

First, publishers have embraced the Internet as a distribution medium but, for the most part, have not used the medium beyond that, simply distributing material in the same way as in printed form.

Think of what could happen if such DOIs were not only assigned to papers as they are now, but also to items of content within biological databases—protein structures, species distributions, neuroimaging datasets, and so on—and if these DOIs were referenced when that content was used or discussed elsewhere.

Consider one final experiment, what if papers were made to show a higher level of organization than is possible today? Clearly, too much additional work by the author would be resisted, unless it bought clear rewards. Nevertheless, tools can be envisaged that, with minimal work by the author, would further classify the text such that, for example, annotation associated with a particular gene or set of genes is identified, or a set of keywords is generated to be associated with the paper as metadata, and all the author would have to do is confirm their validity.



# Comments
