
Adventures in semantic publishing: exemplar semantic enhancements of a research article
=======================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q21092566]  

# Highlights

--> Core for - 3.2. Community annotation of texts via Wikidata 

Semantic enhancements we have made to a recent biomedical research article taken from PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases, providing enrichment to its content and increased access to datasets within it. T

These semantic enhancements include
- provision of live DOIs and hyperlinks; 
semantic markup of textual terms, with links to relevant third-party information resources; 
interactive figures; 
a re-orderable reference list; 
a document summary containing a study summary, a tag cloud, and a citation analysis; 
and two novel types of semantic enrichment: the first, a Supporting Claims Tooltip to permit ‘‘Citations in Context’’, and the second, Tag Trees that bring together semantically related terms.

We have also published machine-readable RDF metadata both about the article and about the references it cites, for which we developed a Citation Typing Ontology, CiTO (http://purl.org/net/cito/)


--> Nice, maybe the begining of cito?

The enhanced article, which is available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0000228.x001, presents a compelling existence proof of the possibilities of semantic publication.

--> Article is still available and tags are functional!

We define the term semantic publication to include anything that enhances the meaning of a published journal article, facilitates its automated discovery, enables its linking to semantically related articles, provides access to data within the article in actionable form, or facilitates integration of data between articles. We

Reciprocal citation between papers and datasets is essential, and frictionless interoperability between papers and datasets is highly desirable

Elsevier recently launched the Elsevier Grand Challenge: Knowledge Enhancement in the Life Sciences (http://www.elseviergrandchallenge.com/), seeking proposals ‘‘to improve the interpretation and identification of meaning in online journals and text databases relating to the life sciences’’.

Approaches adopted in our work are of general applicability. To appreciate this, consider the case of mashups of research data with Google Maps or Google Earth, which we describe for the PLoS NTDs article below. 

What we did to enhance this PLoS NTDs paper was not rocket science.

One of the most significant aspects of semantic publication is that of making the raw numerical data contained within an article available to readers as actionable data that they can manipulate.

Semantic annotation of text highlights key concepts, and facilitates skimming a document.

We provided such semantic enhancements to the title, text, and reference titles of our selected PLoS NTDs article, in the form of optional colored highlighting for textual instances of nine classes of textual entities: date, disease, habitat, institution, organism (English name), person (Proper name), place, protein, and taxon (Latin Linnaean genus or species name),

In our enhanced document, most of these highlighted terms were given no external links.

--> Wikidata now can do this almost seamlessly!

In classical scholarship, thanks to the commentary tradition, citations were made to individual sections or paragraphs of referenced works, which were usually cited verbatim, since the referenced works might not be readily available to all readers. However, modern scientific references are made to the cited work as a complete entity, with no textual citation.

To permit the key evidence to be presented to the reader in the context of the initial in-text bibliographic citation, we thus implemented a Supporting Claims Tooltip that permits key supporting statements from the cited reference to be displayed in a small ‘‘hover box’’ that appears when the reader hovers the mouse pointer over the relevant in-text reference citation. We have named this service Citations in Context.

Tag trees provide a novel way of combining the benefits of a tag cloud with the semantic order of a hierarchy. 
To make the tag cloud and tag trees work effectively, we combined similar terms manually.

Alternative language abstract. The 2008 PLoS NTDs article by Reis et al. [12] reports studies undertaken in Brazil with Brazilian authors, and was published with a Portuguese version of the abstract that is available within the Supplementary Information of the original article as a downloadable Word document. 
We converted this into a Web document, and added buttons to permit the highlighting ofnamed entities within it, as in the main enhanced article, e.g., ‘‘ratos’’ and ‘‘galinhas’’ (rats and chickens) as organisms, and ‘‘anticorpos contra Leptospira’’ (Leptospira antibodies) as proteins

--> Nice!

Provenance information.

We added an array of buttons immediately before the reference list that gives the reader the ability to re-order the references in four ways: in alphabetical order, by publication year,by frequency of in-text citation, and by reference number (i.e., reversion to the original order) (Figure 8).

We added links to Nature’s citation bookmarking service Connotea, to the Web 2.0 social bookmarking service Delicious, to our own Creative Commons license for the enhanced work, and to the XHTML/RDFa Web page validation service of the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) that shows that our enhanced work meets these standards for Web interoperability.

The RDFa standard (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RDFa; http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml-rdfa-primer/; http://www.w3.org/TR/rdfa-syntax) provides a method for embedding RDF metadata statements into conventional HTML Web pages. 
While primarily intended for automated processing, the RDFa can be downloaded for human inspection using the ‘‘Extract RDFa’’ link in the enhanced document’s footer.

In undertaking the work described in this paper, we first scoped possible enhancements, identifying those that were easy, moderately difficult, or hard to implement, and those that were essential, desirable, or peripheral to our primary purpose of providing a compelling ‘‘existence proof’’ of the possibilities of a semantically enriched publication.

--> Many good ideas of how to enhance the text.

There are immense semantic challenges in capturing metadata in such principled ways: first in developing terminologies that are sufficiently comprehensive, usable, and stable that people will actually employ them to annotate their research data; and second (and more difficult) in keeping them up to date in the face of evolving biological knowledge, in ways that permit provenance

What is now required is for the community of infectious disease researchers collectively to develop a MIIDI Standard—minimal information required for reporting an infectious disease investigation.

In a separate paper [26], we reviewed the status of semantic publishing in the autumn of 2008, and the prospect for such semantic enhancements becoming routine. In brief, we see publishers, editors, and authors all playing important roles.

Microsoft has just published a second plug-in permitting ontology-based semantic markup of named entities (http://ucsdbiolit.codeplex.com/)

We solicit feedback from readers (by e-mail to david.shotton@- zoo.ox.ac.uk) about the added value they perceive in these various enhancements and outputs, relative to the originally published version of the PLoS NTDs article

We hope this work will encourage authors, data producers, publishers, and information consumers to use the Web to its full potential for scientific publications

## Text S1
Technical implementation of the semantic enhancements

A subversion (svn) repository was used to store versions of the enhanced article, and a wiki was employed to record our methods and experiences.

The Cascading Style Sheet (CSS) and JavaScript files used in the final enhanced version of the selected PLoS NTD article are to be found at http://purl.org/net/semanticpublication/pntd.0000228/enrichment.css and http://purl.org/net/semanticpublication/pntd.0000228/enrichment.js.

We used namespaces that are simple, relevant and widely used: DC, DC Terms, FOAF, PRISM (selected terms), FRBR, time and Geo.  Where we could find no appropriate external ontology, as was the case for citation typing, we created one, the Citation Type Ontology (http://purl.org/net/cito/), described below.  An explanation of the technical implementation of the various semantic enhancements now follows:

# Comments

A thorough discussion of the benefits of semantic enhancement.
I really want to do "deep enhancement" via Wikidata.