
Adding a little reality to building ontologies for biology
==========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q21136172]  

# Highlights

Ontologies have also become a cornerstone of computational biology and bioinformatics. As computationally amenable artifacts they are, themselves, a direct part of computational biology; many computational biologists are involved in their production and maintenance. Many more use ontologies to summarise their data, often by looking for over-representation

hese stem not from engineering practice, but from a perspective called realism


While it is argued by some that it is possible to represent only reality when making a domain description, there has, however, been little discussion on whether it is necessarily desirable to do so

 the somewhat quixotic, “terms […] should correspond to instances in reality”. These stem not from engineering practice, but from a perspective called realism.

We suggest that the application of realism results in ontologies that are over-complex, awkward or limited; as such, realism falls far short of its aim of increasing the fitness-for-purpose of ontologies.

--> Damn boy, that is strong! Strong, and well supported (I believe).

In short, for this paper, when we say “realism”, we largely mean “realism as practiced by BFO”. We do not claim, in this paper, to address all the philosophical perspectives that through time carried the name “realism”.

The “real” in realism refers, in fact, to the belief that the categories that we can use to divide entities are, themselves, real.

The conceptualist, however, argues that the categories that they term concepts are a product of social agreement. Conversely, the realist argues that these categories that they term universals are themselves real, that is mind independent in their own right, like the entities they describe.

--> I guess I am _naturally_ a conceptualist.

Russell [15] says “if I have failed to make Aristotle's theory of universals clear, that is (I maintain) because it is not clear”. 
a third possibility that is a more empirical view—that is, if categories (or other models) help in describing and predicting experimental data, then they are useful regardless of whether they are real or otherwise [17].

 while the requirements from Gruber's definition—a formal specification—are necessary, realist ontologies add the requirement that “the nodes and edges correspond not to concepts but, rather, to entities in reality”

 concepts such as “function” [13] have raised more discussion [20]; is this “real” or just a word biologists use as a point of reference?

 the PATO ontology, which is documented as being built according to realist principles, the first approach has been taken, using the HSV scheme. HSV (Hue, Saturation, Value)

 Is “Hue as in HSV” the same or different from “Hue as in HSL” (HSL is another additive colour model).

 We suggest from this analysis that it is necessary, if unfortunate, for some qualities to be explicitly described with multiple representations. To avoid confusion, the universal quality, colour, would need to be explicitly described as having multiple valid models. Yet, realism argues that we should not do this, as colour is real and not a model; more over, the focus on realism means that the documentation does not describe the choices that have been made, nor refer to the relationship between Color Hue (PATO:0000015) and “Hue as in HSV”. In short, realism has limited our ability to represent colour.


Taking the realist approach, we can continue to rely on the implicit knowledge of the biologist, as we have previously relied on an implicit understanding of the natural numbers.

We can be explicit about the properties of these sequences (additional to those properties shared with the naturals). We can talk about non-real world concepts such as alphabets, transformations and how these map to the real entities involved.
It should be noted that the former severely limits the ability to describe the central dogma.

The BMI range is split into 4 categories: Obese (30), Overweight (25), Normal (18.5) and Underweight (18.5). These categories represent ranges of the value of BMI.

This data simplification has many justifications. On an individual basis, the BMI is not a particularly accurate measure, so the simplification does not lose much accuracy. It is also easier to describe to patients, for whom a “BMI of 25” will be less comprehensible than being “overweight”.

For the statistician or computer scientist, there is an additional advantage to the simplification; four discrete groups have better computational properties than a continuous measure. Database queries become easier to write, and quicker to run.

Physical biological entities such as cells and organisms have an extent in the real world. This paper's first author, for example, has a height of around ; a similar value cannot be applied meaningfully to the electronic version of this document, although it may apply to the paper that it may be printed on

If the ontology builder is to be consistent, then, they should make the same choice in both cases; if we describe colour models, we should explicitly describe Minkowskian spacetime, quantuum probability distributions, cartesian and polar systems.

The Newtonian view of the world is the best model in this case: it is good enough. When building an ontology for biomedicine, it makes most sense to use this view as it will produce the results required. If, in the future, biomedicine advances so that relativistic or quantuum representations are necessary, then current ontologies will need refactoring; even then, this future cost is likely to be offset by gains in the present.

For an ecologist counting the number of trees in a sampling square 100m  by 100m, they will take the area as 10000m ; The surface is, however, neither smooth nor a Euclidean plane, so this area is wrong in reality

Realism has been held up as a methodology for “good” ontological modelling, and the production of more tightly defined and consistent ontologies. In this paper, we have discussed five different cases, with biological examples, that we might wish to model ontologically; for each, we have presented different models, describing the same underlying science. In each case, a realist solution is possible, but places either limitations or awkwardness on the models produced.

 It makes little sense to replicate the models of physics using English instead of a more precise mathematical notation. If BFO had been built using direct links to a grounded physical model of the world, it seems likely that these problems would not have arisen.

As bioinformaticians, we build ontologies to provide a descriptive and predictive model of the wealth of experimental data that is now available. In biology, the job of an ontologist is to describe data such that it can be analysed. Naturally this entails a description of entities in reality; it also, however, entails a description of science, and it entails compromise; we overlook this to our peril. The last 200 years of science shows the success and strength of this position; it is on this groundwork that we should build for the future.
# Comments
These guys know their sh*t

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q21136172)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q21136172)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q21136172/P921%3BP4510)  
