
Getting started in text mining
==============================
  
  [@wikidata:Q21145382]  

# Highlights
There are at least as many motivations for doing text mining work as there are types of bioscientists.

although several systems have been built and deployed in the past few years—Chilibot, Textpresso, and PreBIND (see Text S1 for these and most other citations), for example—the ones that are seeing high usage rates and are making productive contributions to the working lives of bioscientists have been built not by text mining specialists, but by bioscientists

a simple rule-based system might use hard- coded patterns—for example, ,gene. plays a role in ,disease. or ,disease. is associated with ,gene.—to find explicit statements about the classes of things in which the researcher is interested.

statistical or machine-learning–based systems operate by building classifiers that may operate on any level, from labelling part of speech to choosing syntactic parse trees to classifying full sentences or documents

In practice, statistical and rule-based systems can be fruitfully combined.

ambiguities are not trivial: if your analysis is wrong, you miss or erroneously extract information on relations between molecular biology and human disease.

--> Unresolvable ambiguities may exist in published works. 

Another important early step is potentially time-consuming, but of great importance: sitting down with a large set of potential inputs and examining them by hand. Scientists without linguistic training are often amazed at the range of linguistic possibilities for expressing even the most apparently simple biological concepts. Four hours spent with a pile of articles and a highlighter may forestall many unpleasant surprises.

For evaluation of suitability for internal use, the best paradigm might not be the publishing-oriented corpus- based one, but rather a test suite built on the principles of software engineering and structured software testing.
[9] is the standard reference work, and is a good second step

9. Jurafsky D, Martin JH (2000) Speech and language processing: An introduction to natural language processing, computational linguistics and speech recognition. Lebanon (Indiana): Prentice Hall

--> This is indeed everywhere.
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q21145382)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q21145382)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q21145382/P921%3BP4510)  
