
An ontology for cell types
==========================
  
  [@wikidata:Q21184168]  

# Highlights

The annotation of  phenotypes is hampered by a lack of structured information describing a variety of other biological objects, including cell types.
To address these needs, we have developed an ontology that describes the cell types of the major model organisms, both animal and plant.

Its use will allow a biologist to query a single database with such questions as:
- list all of the cell types in mouse that express the Notch gene 
- list all of the cell types in Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans that express the closest homolog of this gene.

The first design decision was whether we should attempt to integrate cell types from all phyla within a single ontology or build independent ontologies for different taxonomic groups.

Despite these problems in building an 'integrated' cell-type ontology, the advantages, were we to succeed, outweigh them.

It is far from obvious that vertebrate and invertebrate pigment cells are homologous and these concepts are therefore described as pigment_cell_(sensu_Vertebrata) and pigment_cell_(sensu_Nematoda_and_Protostoma), respectively.

The two top-level nodes of the Cell Ontology are cell_in_vivo and experimentally_modified_cell.

The organism-independent classification of cells follows several different criteria that include:
- 'function' (for example, electrically_excitable_cell, secretory_cell, photosynthetic_cell), 
- histology (for example, epthelial_cell, mesenchyme_cell), 
- lineage (for example, ectodermal_cell, endodermal_cell) and 
- ploidy (for example, haploid_cell, polyploid_cell).

Kupffer cells are specialized vertebrate macrophages of the reticuloendothelial system. They function to filter small foreign particles (including bacteria) and old reticulocytes from the blood. In the Cell Ontology they are to be found by their function (they are a type of defensive_cell), by their lineage (they are derived from a mesodermal_cell derived from a hematopoietic_stem_cell, itself a type of stem_cell), by their morphology (they are a type of circulating_cell) and by their organism (they are a type of animal_cell).

It is designed to be useful in the sense that a researcher should be able to find, in a rapid and intuitive way, any cell type in any of the major model organisms and, having found it, learn a considerable amount about that cell type and its relationships to other biological objects.

Cell-type unique identifiers (ID) that can be incorporated into any database holding cell-type-associated knowledge.

While we expect such bioinformatics applications to be its immediate use, we hope that, in the longer term, all biologists will find the ontology useful

Cells are the biological units with which tissues and organs and organ systems are built. A rich and explicit description of cell types across phyla that are adapted by bio- logical databases will help facilitate this transition.

These cell types have been collated from our own knowledge, from major textbooks (for example [20-22])

20. Williams PL, (Ed): Gray's Anatomy 38th edition. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 1996.
21. Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Walter P: The Molecular Biology of the Cell 4th edition. New York: Garland; 2002.
22. Esau K: The Anatomy of Seed Plants 2nd edition. New York: John Wiley; 1977


# Comments

- list all of the cell types in mouse that express the Notch gene : We can kind of do that on Wikidata now!


The architecture of CL has changed over time. 

The CL had originally a _learning_ goal (among others) : "learn a considerable amount" . This explains a "bias" towards didactic definitions of cell types. 

--> - 1.3.1.4. Cell Ontology (and CELDA)

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q21184168)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q21184168)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q21184168/P921%3BP4510)  
