
BioGPS: an extensible and customizable portal for querying and organizing gene annotation resources.
====================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q21183895]  

# Highlights

In prioritizing this gene list,
many researchers would commonly search Entrez Gene [1] and Ensembl [2] as a first stop for many descriptions of critical gene annotation information, including primary sequence data, genome position, associated Gene Ontology terms, gene structure, and genetic variation. Other researchers may then consult the Mouse Genome Database (MGD) [3] and Rat Genome Database (RGD) [4] for annotation focused on these model organisms, including knockout phenotypes and quantitative trait loci. 

--> I guess this is pre-enrichr

Finally, new online resources are continually being developed, and staying abreast of these tools and evaluating their utility is a time-consuming and recurring task.

Here, we introduce BioGPS, a gene annotation portal based on a loose federation of existing genetic and genomic resources. BioGPS allows users to easily explore the landscape of gene annotation resources for one or more genes of interest.

 The 'Wikipedia' layout shows the Gene Wiki plugin (which, like BioGPS, is another recent community intelligence initiative)

Community intelligence initiatives are based on the idea that a large community of users can collectively and collaboratively synthesize knowledge. The most visible example of this idea is the online encyclopedia Wikipedia, in which over nine million registered users have collaboratively written almost three million articles


Although BioGPS superficially is a simple gene annotation
hub, we believe it is unique for leveraging the idea of community intelligence toward collaboratively building an online
gene annotation resource.


# Comments
1.3

Site is currently offline
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q21183895)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q21183895)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q21183895/P921%3BP4510)  
