
Building a biomedical semantic network in Wikipedia with Semantic Wiki Links
============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q21169186]  

# Highlights

Wikipedia is increasingly used as a platform for collaborative data curation, but its current technical implementation has significant limitations that hinder its use in biocuration applications.

Here, we introduce a straightforward method that allows Wikipedia editors to embed computable semantic relations directly in the context of current Wikipedia articles. In addition, we demonstrate two novel applications enabled by the presence of these new relationships

The first is a dynamically generated information box that can be rendered on all semantically enhanced Wikipedia articles. The second is a prototype gene annotation system that draws its content from the gene-centric articles on Wikipedia and exposes the new semantic relationships to enable previously impossible,


--> Nice, pre Wikidata stuff.

Several groups decided to focus their efforts in the context of a community that is already large and active—Wikipedia (3, 4). Rather than building a novel wiki and then working to attract users, these initiatives started with a very large user base and worked to help these users expand and im- prove the content of the articles relevant to their initiatives.

In addition to aiding navigation for users, hyperlinks may implicitly indicate meaningful relationships between concepts.

While independent wikis, like SNPedia (10), use the SMW extension to more effectively organize the information contained in them, Wikipedia has not yet taken this step.

--> Now it has!

We introduced the Semantic Wiki Link (SWL) template into Wikipedia as a partial solution for encoding, but not querying, semantic content.

Because Wikipedia is not yet capable of processing seman- tic relations, SWLs are currently only useful for representing the semantic nature of relationships.

In addition to providing novel functionality for end users, the Gene Wiki+ system provides access to its content for developers in the form of a Resource Description Framework (RDF) export (http://genewikiplus.org/wiki/GeneWiki:Data).

--> URL not found :(

Whether these applications will be enough to motivate
the Wikipedia community to accept and use SWLs is an open question. In our early interactions with the editor community, there has been some resistance to the use of the SWL template on the grounds that it makes the WikiText more difficult to edit. However, there have also been some enthusiastic responses from community mem- bers who see the potential of the idea. As this project un- folds over time, we will work with the editors to come to a solution that the community can wholeheartedly accept.

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q21169186)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q21169186)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q21169186/P921%3BP4510)  
