
CELDA -- an ontology for the comprehensive representation of cells in complex systems
=====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q21284308]  

# Highlights

CELDA (Cell: Expression, Localization, Development, Anatomy) is a novel ontology for the association of primary experimental data and derived knowledge to various types of cells of organisms.

CELDA can semantically link diverse types of information about cell types. It has been integrated within the research platform CellFinder, where it exemplarily relates cell types from liver and kidney during development on the one hand and anatomical locations in humans on the other, integrating information on all spatial and temporal stages. CELDA is available from the CellFinder website: http://cellfinder.org/about/ontology .

We developed a novel, comprehensive ontology, CELDA (Cell: Expression, Localization, Development, Anatomy) to formally represent important characteristics of cell type

(1) Which data and data sources on cell type description are available? 
(2) Which properties are needed to fully describe cells in vivo and in vitro? 
(3) How does an ontology need to be designed in order to allow a structured and standardized description of the properties defined in (2)

This general framework was com-
bined with the modeling approaches suggested in the “Good Practice Ontology Design Principles” by Schulz et al.


For de- scribing both cell types in vivo and in vitro, we needed to cover biological functions (e.g. the barrier function), cytology and histology (including subcellular structures), lineage (using the relation develops-from), expressed genes, origin (e.g. anatomical location, species, gender, age) and the genome status (e.g. ploidy) of the cell types.

--> Yep! But this task is _huge_, maybe needs a 20-year plan or something of the sort.

The lineage of cell types is described in CL, CLO and
EFO. These ontologies also partially address the origin of cell types, but only EFO contains terms to describe the species of origin. While both CLO and EFO contain terms to distinguish between sexes, only EFO contains terms for age. To fully describe the origin of cell types, ontologies from the anatomical domain can be used.

--> Lots of mixing of types and cell lines.

According to Courtot et al. [33], there are three general possibilities when referencing external ontology sources:
1. create own classes and reference other ontology classes,
2. generate and import modules of other ontologies, 
3. import whole resources.In most cases, we decided to import the whole resource

Several approaches exist to evaluate new ontologies. Obrst et al. suggested six different evaluation techniques for the use of ontologies in life sciences [37-39]:
1. assessment by humans against a set of criteria 
2.  comparison of the ontology against a set of criteria 
3.  evaluate the use of the ontology in an application
4.  natural language evaluation techniques 
5.  ontology accreditation and certification
6.  use reality as a benchmark.

CL was linked to BioTop by defining CL:Cell as equivalent to BioTop:Cell.

--> Cell Line is represented as a subclass of cell, that is slightly innacurate. A "cell line cell" is a subclass of cell.

The EFO contains a class called “cell type” with a matching definition (“distinct morphological or functional form of cell”), but the subclasses (e.g. “blast cell” or “fibroblast”) make it clear that the instances of these classes are, in fact, cells and not cell types or cell forms. For this reason, we interpreted EFO:cell type as a class of cells whose subclasses categorize cells according to their type or form.

--> Confusing

CELDA has been developed in order to be used within the CellFinder project (http://cellfinder.org). CellFinder is a web-based data repository for scientific statements about cell types.

To test the application of CELDA on the representation of developmental trees, we chose to represent cell types involved in human kid- ney development in order to reduce the data scope.

--> Seems something ready for Wikidata.

Altogether, we found 145 cell types taking part in kidney development. 75 of these cell types in the developmental tree were not part of the CL and were included in CELDA based on manual data extraction from the sources mentioned above. The developmental tree can be viewed online at http://cellfinder.org/development.

As the cell types described in CL are species- independent, we extended CELDA with species-specific classes for each of the 145 identified cell types relevant for kidney development when no equivalent class was found in FMA or EHDAA for human or in MA for mouse. These classes were linked to the species- independent classes using a rdfs:SubclassOf relation.

Discussion CELDA is an ontology for the formal description of cell types built by using and carefully extending existing ontologies from the biological domain. It integrates dif- ferent dimensions of cell types at the genetic, molecular, structural, functional, temporal and spatial level. It also addresses the organization of cell types into higher- order structures (e.g. develops from or anatomical location).

When re-using existing ontologies, we store them on our server and use this version instead of using other versions provided, for example, by the OBO Foundry or by the authors of the ontologies. This allows CELDA to be independent of these data sources and assures that the ontologies are available in the version needed.

By serving as a data model for the CellFinder data repository, CELDA has provided a proof of concept that it may be suitable for scientific applications in cell biology.

The label “cell type” probably rests on a confu- sion between the two relations of instantiation and subclasshood (which are not distinguished, e.g., in many thesauri [54]). While subclasses of the class Cell are, of course, types of cells, all instances of Cell are particular cells that exist at a certain time and could, e.g., be viewed under the microscope. A closer inspection of the use of the label “cell type” showed that its instances (or at least instances of subclasses) were, in fact, meant to be particular cells. The general lesson to be learnt is that ontology designers should be very careful with the nam- ing and should also have an eye on problems that could occur when the ontology to be developed is combined with other resources.

A difficult issue was brought up by the question of
when to call a cell a human cell. In canonical cases, human cells are (1) part of a living human organism and (2) derive from a human zygote. A baboon heart transplanted to a human organism may fulfill the first criterion, but not the second, whereas human brain cells transplanted to mice fulfill the second criterion, but after the transplantation no longer the first.

Cells of multicel- lular organisms are called “in vivo cells” if they are part of a living organism. The existence of xenografts, how- ever, shows that we have to distinguish between several cases: (1a) cells within the organism that developed from the same zygote from which the cell developed, (1b) cells within an organism that developed from a zygote of the same species as the zygote from which the cell devel- oped, and (2) cells within an organism of a different spe- cies. The strictures of description logics (on which OWL is based) do not allow us to distinguish between the cases (1a) and (1b), but they allow us to set off (2) as a distinct possibility

--> Dang, that is a good point!!

n CELDA, we decided to reserve the label “human cell in vivo” for cells only that fulfill both criteria, i.e.

The reasoners exposed areas in the ontology where new classes were needed to ac- commodate species-specific expression of cellular markers and inferred new relationships within the CL and between the CL and the contributing ontologies.

Conclusions The new ontology, CELDA, integrates and extends already existing ontologies in order to represent cell types as described in current research. CELDA relates cell types not only to other cell types, but also to ana- tomical components and cellular structures from other OBO library ontologies

The outline of CELDA pro- vides for the first time a solution to facilitate the integra- tion of ontologies from multiple domains that can also be applied to other cell-centered data repositories.

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q21284308)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q21284308)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q21284308/P921%3BP4510)  
