
An improved ontological representation of dendritic cells as a paradigm for all cell types
==========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q21284365]  

# Highlights

Currently, the CL employs multiple is_a relations, defining cell types in terms of histological, functional, and lineage properties, and the majority of definitions are written with sufficient generality to hold across multiple species. This approach limits the CL's utility for computation and for cross-species data integration.

DC-CL subtypes are delineated on the basis of surface protein expression, systematically including both species-general and species-specific types and optimizing DC-CL for the analysis of flow cytometry data.

To help meet the data annotation needs of model organism researchers, Bard and colleagues developed an ontology of cell types that has been widely used for the annotation of data in genome and other biological databases, including biorepository data. 

Each cell type within the CL is related to at least one supertype via the is_a (subtype) relation, but most CL cell types have multiple supertypes, and are thus classified on multiple axes, a phenomenon referred to as 'is_a overloading.'

We developed a systematic approach for the ontological representation of cells that

- separates classification via the is_a relation from the assertion of structural, functional, and lineage properties by using formally defined, property-specific relations, such as has_function
- systematically includes both species-neutral and species-specific representations of cell types
- defines cell types on the basis of specific combinations of surface proteins used for identification of the cells via flow cytometry

We have applied our method to develop an extension of the CL, DC-CL, for dendritic cells (DC), focusing on the DC types observed in mice and humans and optimizes it for the analysis of flow cytometry data. 

In the immunological literature and research community, the term 'dendritic cell' does not refer to a single, clearly distinguishable cell type; rather it refers to cells from a variety of sub-populations that have different morphologies, are distributed across different microenvironments within the body, express different microbial receptors and surface molecules, and different cytokines.

We chose DCs as our case study in order to standardize the current terminology and definitions for DC subtypes and provide a common point of reference from which to maintain a common representation of DCs as knowledge about their subtypes evolves.

To develop a general method for the ontological representation of cell types, we first identified five families of cellular properties that can hold for a given cell type across the various microenvironments in which the cell type can be found. We identified the following five such families of properties:

- structural components, such as granules in the cytoplasm or molecules on the cell surface
- functions cells of the given type perform
- dispositions, such as the tendency to participate in certain types of processes
- anatomical locations in which the cells are found and
-lineage relationships.

More precisely, we classify DCs by surface protein expression

In addition, in constructing DC-CL we employed accepted principles of ontology development outlined by the OBO Foundry, including the use of genus-differentia definitions.

Types are general; they are the kinds of things that exist and are documented in scientific textbooks (e.g. human, red blood cell); instances are particular; they are the specific examples upon which experiments are performed (e.g. J. Craig Venter, the many red blood cells in my body)

Cell types in DC-CL are defined in terms of the proteins and protein complexes expressed on the cell surfaces of the corresponding instances, consistent with the characterization of DC populations using surface protein expression.

The definitions of such types thus involve terms representing proteins in the Protein Ontology (PRO) and protein complexes in the Gene Ontology Cellular Component Ontology (GO CC). The reference to proteins and protein complexes enables us to assert the specific presence or absence of defining molecules on cells of a given type.

CD11c- plasmacytoid dendritic cell is_a leukocyteCL that 
- has_plasma_membrane_part CD45RAPRO and 
- has_plasma_membrane_part CD123PRO and 
- has_plasma_membrane_part CD303PRO and 
- has_plasma_membrane_part ILT7PRO and 
- lacks_plasma_membrane_part CD11cPRO and 
- lacks_plasma_membrane_part CD3PRO and 
- lacks_plasma_membrane_part CD19PRO and
- lacks_plasma_membrane_part CD34PRO and 
- lacks_plasma_membrane_part CD56PRO

For example, two defined classes of plasmacytoid DCs might be distinguished, those that do and those that do not express CCR7 on their respective membranes.

For example, CD11clow plasmacytoid DCs express low levels of CD11c relative to leukocytes and are defined this way in DC-CL.

Such assertions are needed for example to distinguish conventional DCs (CD11c high), CD11c low plasmacytoid DCs, and CD11c negative plasmatcytoid DCs.

To define these relations, we first define the functional operators geometric_mean_of and number_of. The first is defined in the usual way, as a function from a set of numbers to their geometric mean. To best facilitate cross-species data interoperability, ontologies need to provide both species-neutral and species-specific terms. Species-neutral terms allow for commonalities between species to be identified.

PRO is species-neutral in the sense that, proteins from different species that are the products of orthologous genes are instances of the same PRO gene product level type, and proteins from different species representing equivalent forms (e.g. CD45RA in human and mouse) are instances of the same sequence variant level or protein isoform level types.

To avoid the unnecessary creation of overly specific subtypes, we define cell types in terms of PRO gene product level types, and recommend that PRO types at this level be used wherever possible.

In addition to defining the DC types by the presence or absence of specific surface proteins, we include assertions about which of the Toll-like receptors (TLR) are expressed on each DC type. Future work on DC-CL will include incorporation of assertions about other molecules important to immune function.

DCs have a complicated biology; so DCs are a good model for testing a method for representing cells in an ontology.

The inclusion of species-specific cell types allows for the more specific annotation of data and for the incorporation within DC-CL of species-specific properties, many of which have important functional consequences.

To define cell types on the basis of species of origin, or to include assertions that hold for the type in one species but not another, we recommend the creation of species-specific extensions rather than the inclusion of such types in CL or DC-CL. This approach allows for the representation of detailed, species-specific information without using multiple modes of classification (structure and species of origin) or including conflicting assertions in the core ontology. 

Such statistical methods can be applied to the analysis of individual flow data sets, while ontology definitions need to hold universally, across different experimental designs, protocols, and equipment and across differences in the resulting distributions of fluorescence intensities for reference cells. Indeed, the ontology definitions should hold across different assays for surface protein expression, and should not be tied directly to flow cytometry.

We have therefore taken a relatively simple approach to the formulation of cell definitions that hold universally and that are supported by our current understanding of DC biology. It is our hope, however, that our work will encourage the use of more objective criteria in the analysis of flow cytometry data and in the description and analysis of cell types in general.

DC-CL provides a prospectively highly valuable resource for the study of DCs. It further offers a generalizable method for the ontological representation of cells that offers significant benefits in the form of increasing the amount and accuracy of information contained in the ontology, enhancing support of the ontology for compu- tation, and providing a much needed resource to support analysis of high-throughput, multidimensional flow data. Thus, we propose the method used to create DC-CL as a strategy for the representation of all cells of hematopoietic lineage



# Comments

Utility maximized for computational analysis --> There might be a trade off with real research setttings.

species neutral representation!! this is very imaginative. 

The definitions they raise are artificial: in practice, the concepts used are different. 

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q21284365)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q21284365)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q21284365/P921%3BP4510)  
