
Utilizing the Wikidata system to improve the quality of medical content in Wikipedia in diverse languages: a pilot study
========================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q21503276]  

# Highlights

Objective: We created a prototypical implementation of an automated system for keeping drug-drug interaction (DDI) information in Wikipedia up to date with current evidence about clinically significant drug interactions.

Our work is based on Wikidata, a novel, graph-based database backend of Wikipedia currently in development.

We derived 1150 unique interactions from the ONC high priority list. 

Integration of the potential DDI data from Wikidata into Wikipedia articles proved to be straightforward and yielded useful results.

Our prototype demonstrated that automated updating of medical content in Wikipedia through Wikidata is a viable option, albeit further refinements and community-wide consensus building are required before integration into public Wikipedia is possible.

A long-term endeavor to improve the medical information in Wikipedia through structured data representation and automated workflows might lead to a significant improvement of the quality of medical information in one of the world’s most popular Web resources.

As such, Wikidata could emerge as a community-backed and highly visible structured knowledge base of medical and biological information, bringing concepts and methodologies such as controlled taxonomies, Semantic Web / semantic technologies and ontologies into mainstream use.

--> Yes!!

The practice of using claims (instead of “facts”) reflects the notion that Wikidata anticipates and embraces situations in which conflicting claims are made when different sources might disagree. An advantage of this data model is that only claims with sources are considered as complete statements and that disagreement in the sources can be modeled by adding multiple statements.

Adding Data to Wikidata and Wikipedia

--> Nice description of the process.

Still, the existence of these long lists of interactions for some drugs might lead to unsatisfactory usability or reduced findability of important information. An alternative could be the integration of the Wikidata information into the main text of the Wikipedia article as exemplified in Figure 4.


Detailed Analysis of Exemplary Wikipedia Drug Articles The following detailed analyses of DDI information in Wikipedia articles for the drugs ramelteon and warfarin exemplify some of the limitations of the current Wikipedia article coverage of DDIs from the perspective of a professional pharmacologist.

Better data quality in Wikidata can reduce the maintenance work required in Wikipedia, giving editors more time to focus
on the quality of articles.

If an article exists in all 288 languages of Wikipedia, keeping it up to date or adding a piece of data
with Wikidata amounts to a single edit compared to 288 edits without Wikidata. 
This helps to improve the completeness and currentness of medical content on Wikipedia, a resource that
has become central to health information seeking among patients and health professionals on a global scale.

We believe that this work provides a foundation for a long-term endeavor to improve the medical information in Wikipedia
through structured data representation and automated workflows.
It will strengthen the collaboration with the medical Wikipedia
community to bring high-quality information on drug safety
into production use as part of Wikipedia in diverse languages.
We will also seek to align our work on drug safety information
in Wikidata with projects in related domains, such as biomedical
research and the life sciences [31,32]

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q21503276)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q21503276)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q21503276/P921%3BP4510)  
