
Centralizing content and distributing labor: a community model for curating the very long tail of microbial genomes
===================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q21503281]  
  
Publication date : 12 of November, 2015  

# Highlights
Wikidata is an openly editable, semantic web compatible framework for knowledge representation. It is a project of the Wikimedia Foundation and offers knowledge integration capabilities ideally suited to the challenge of representing the exploding body of information about microbial genomics. We are developing a microbial specific data model, based on Wikidata’s semantic web compatibility, which represents bacterial species, strains and the gene and gene products that define them.

Currently, we have loaded 43 694 gene and 37 966 protein items for 21 species of bacteria, including the human pathogenic bacteria Chlamydia trachomatis. Using this pathogen as an example, we explore complex interactions between the pathogen, its host, associated genes, other microbes, disease and drugs using the Wikidata SPARQL endpoint.

Illustration of the complex network of interacting entities between human, chlamydial, and other microbial species in the urogenital microbiome. 

On a technical level, Wikidata is fundamentally a graph database ( 16 ). It has no overarching schema to ordain what kind of data elements can be linked together. In contrast to a standard relational model, this empowers database contributors to freely expand connections as they see fit


As an example, a user can easily retrieve all genes, proteins, and gene ontology annotations for the two strains of Chlamydia that are currently loaded using a Wikidata SPARQL query ( Figure 4 ). 


We see this as the first of many bioinformatics applications that can be enhanced by Wikidata content and can enable expert users to contribute to its collaborative curation.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q21503281)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q21503281)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q21503281/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q21503281&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/DATABASE/BAW028)  
