
From Freebase to Wikidata: The Great Migration
==============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q24074986]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2016  

# Highlights
The two major collaborative knowledge bases are Wikimedia’s Wikidata
and Google’s Freebase. Due to the success of Wikidata,
Google decided in 2014 to offer the content of Freebase to
the Wikidata community.

--> 1.2.4. Wikidata and Knowledge Graphs

Freebase1
is an open and collaborative knowledge base
publicly launched in 2007 by Metaweb and acquired in 2010
by Google [3]. 

n 2014 its intent to close Freebase and help with the migration of the content to Wikidata [10, 15].
Freebase is built on the notions of objects, facts, types,
and properties. Each Freebase object has a stable identifier called a “mid” (for Machine ID)

The second challenge is that the Wikidata community
is very eager to have references for their statements, i.e.,
sources that Freebase usually did not store, except for some
specific data like populations and unemployment rates

The data quality of Freebase was discussed by the Wikidata
community, and it was decided that the quality overall was
not sufficient for a direct import.


For the front-end, our objective was to model the migration process as close to the natural Wikidata editing flow as
possible. Ideally, the user should barely notice the different
underlying datasources when navigating Wikidata.
To achieve this, we have in a first step created a Wikidata
user script. Wikidata user scripts are part of the Wikidata
tool chain13 and are created by users, but unlike gadgets—
to be explained in the following—do not appear in a user’s
preferences. Instead, users have to add a line of code into
their common.js file in order to activate and use the script.
User scripts can be created by anyone and—unlike gadgets—
might not always be stable

Data licensing. Although many books and tutorials on
publishing data on the Web of Data (e.g. [16, 19]) mention the importance of licenses, they are often added as an
afterthought. There have been remarkably few dedicated
publications on the topic [21, 26], none of them written by
lawyers. Due to the lack of understanding surrounding these
topics, we have been cautious and chose to simply remove
any facts from the to-be-migrated data if there were doubts.

Concluding, in a fairly short amount of time, we have been
able to provide the Wikidata community with more than
14 million new Wikidata statements using a customizable
and generalizable approach, consisting of data preparation
scripts and the Primary Sources Tool, which is well integrated into the Wikidata user interface
# Comments

## Tags
1.2.4. Wikidata and Knowledge Graphs
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q24074986)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q24074986)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q24074986/P921%3BP4510)  
