
Petilla terminology: nomenclature of features of GABAergic interneurons of the cerebral cortex
==============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q24620160]  

# Highlights

Classification depends on the unequivocal identification of the features that distinguish one type of neuron from another. Nevertheless, classification criteria often seem to be arbitrarily chosen. 

We propose and publicly endorse a standardized nomenclature of interneuron properties. 

A Pubmed search using the query ‘cortex interneuron’ returns more than 200 reviews. 

Although some traditional terms for cortical interneurons (such as basket cells and chandelier cells) are used here for ease of reference and illustration, the nomenclature proposed does not attempt to give names to different classes of interneurons; instead, it defines the features that can be used for their identification.

--> Nice catalog. It cannot be comprehensive, but nice catalog. 

Figure 2 | Basic morphological features that describe neuronal branching 

synaptic inputs that a cell receives on its dendrites also distinguish it from other cell types. ‘Asymmetric’, or Type I, inputs are mostly glutamatergic and excitatory, whereas ‘symmetric’, or Type II, inputs are mostly GABAergic and inhibitory.

The final pattern of post- synaptic contacts might present recognizable features. ‘Distributed’ patterns are evenly spaced, whereas in a ‘gradient’ pattern the distribution of contacts changes in a specific direction.

On the basis of immunocytochemistry, chandelier cells can be chemically defined as GABAergic cells that contain the Ca2+
-binding proteins parvalbumin and calbindin but not calretinin, and that might also contain the neuropeptide corticotropin-releasing factor but not other neuropeptides, namely cholecystokinin, somatostatin, neuropeptide y, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and tachykinins.

--> Not so easy to define computationally in a KG, but is clear, nice.


. Differences in the degree of spike frequency adapta- tion (expressed as an adaptation ratio for individual cells68
) can be used to distinguish
between broad anatomical and physiologi- cal classes of interneurons (Supplementary information S8). ‘Silent cells’, as their name implies, exhibit no action potentials, although the existence of these cells is debated. other firing patterns are also possible.

Figure 5 | Petilla terminology: types of firing patterns. Cortical GABAergic interneurons display
Nature Reviews | Neuroscience
a vast repertoire of discharge responses. These samples are representative of the most common responses to standardized intrasomatic step-current injections in the rat neocortex.


A community agreement on the most useful and accurate terms to describe the morpho- logical, molecular and electrophysiological features of cortical GABAergic interneurons is an essential step towards establishing and maintaining effective scientific communication in this field.

A community-approved terminology for classifying cortical neurons is also a goal of the Neuroscience Information Framework.

The Petilla terminology, even before its
publication, has already been used as a rec- ognized reference in the recent literatureIdeally, this consensus will foster discussion to identify those features that are most consistently predictive, functionally relevant and empirically useful in characterizing cells in the mammalian nervous system

moreover, intracellular dynamics, such as dendritic Ca2+ signalling can also vary substantially in distinct types and even subtypes of cortical interneurons. Furthermore, properties of
cortical GABAergic interneurons might also differ across species, especially between primates and rodents,

species differences: neurogliaform (nGF) cells in primates and rodents. n both species these interneurons can be readily identified on the basis of their distinctive morphological feature. Although rat NGF cells are traditionally classified as late-spiking cells, monkey NGF cells do not meet this physiological criterion.

A widespread convergence on a common set of terms is necessary. We look forward to a dynamic evolution of the Petilla nomencla- ture with the constructive participation of all active researchers

# Comments

# Links
  
 *[Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q24620160)  
 *[Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q24620160)  
 *[TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q24620160/P921%3BP4510)  
