
MIFlowCyt: the minimum information about a Flow Cytometry Experiment
====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q24644748]  
  
Publication date : 01 of October, 2008  

# Highlights


 Here, we present the Minimum Information about a FlowCytometry Experiment (MIFlowCyt) standard, stating the minimum informationrequired to report flow cytometry (FCM) experiments.

 The standard was subsequently vetted by theInternational Society for Advancement of Cytometry (ISAC) Data Standards TaskForce, Standards Committee, membership, and Council.

Each data set can consist of multidimensionaldescriptions of millions of individual cells, producing data similar in size and com-plexity to gene expression microarrays. Like the microarray field, the ability to collectFCM data is outpacing the computational means for data handling and analysis.

To address these shortcomings, we have brought togethera cross-disciplinary international collaborative group of bioin-formaticians, computational statisticians, software developers,instrument manufacturers, and clinical and basic researchscientists to develop a minimum information reporting stand-ard for FCM. 

Throughout the biomedical sciences, minimum informa-tion checklists are beginning to find favor with scientists, publishers, and funders alike. Such checklists ensure that descrip-tions of methods, resulting data, and analyses support theunambiguous interpretation, corroboration, and reuse of data(5).

MIFlowCyt is explicit in its requirements, following con-straint and design recommendations from professional stand-ardization bodies (e.g., www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt; http://standards.ieee.org/guides/style/

--> good reference; used "shall" instead of "must", though, interesting decision

In a FCM experiment, the analyte is often a cell surfaceprotein (e.g., CD25), the analyte detector is often an antibody(e.g., anti-CD25) that specifically binds the analyte, and thereporter is typically a fluorochrome (e.g., FITC).

Ideally,a list-mode data file contains the set of measured parameters(e.g., fluorescence intensities) for each event (e.g., a cell) col-lected in the sample. These data are crucial for independentreanalysis, and, therefore, either they shall be provided directlyor the details shall be stated on how they may be requested.

The type of compensationshall be described (e.g., no compensation, hardware compen-sation, computed compensation) and the spillover or compen-sation matrix shall be provided whenever available.

The importance of minimal data reporting standards isillustrated by both community-driven standards such asMIAME (13), MIRIAM (14), MISFISHIE (15), and the CON-SORT checklist (16), and cross-community efforts includingMIBBI (5), FuGE (6), and OBI (7). 

The development of MIFlowCyt has been coordinatedwith submission of applicable FCM-specific terms into OBIand other related ontologies, enabling the potential for struc-tured queries and automated data analysis.


# Comments

Endorsements are an important part

## Tags
--> flow cytometry MIA 3.10 Minimal Information Abount New Cell Classes

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q24644748)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q24644748)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q24644748/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q24644748&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/CYTO.A.20623)  
