
The Molecular Pages of the mesotelencephalic dopamine consortium (DopaNet)
==========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q24802073]  

# Highlights

DopaNet Molecular Pages are highly structured descriptions of quantitative parameters related to a specific molecular complex involved in neuronal signal processin

Each piece of data is identified by a specific ontology code, annotated (method of acquisition, species, etc.) and linked to the relevant bibliography. The Molecular Pages are stored as XML files, and processed through the DopaNet Web Service, which provides functionalities to edit the Molecular Pages, to cross-link the Pages and generate the public display, and to search them.

As of June 2004, 35 European teams from 8 countries are part of the project. DopaNet became a network of the European Sci- ence Foundation (ESF) in January 2003.

This ontology will there- fore act as a glue, relating the various pieces of data one to the other.

List of maintainers Maintainers are the only people authorized to directly modify the Molecular Pages.

List of contributors Contributors are all the people who bring new informa- tion about a Molecular Page, or correct an existing piece of information. Contributors can be seen as the equivalent of authors of an article. Except maintainers (who are con- tributors by definition), they cannot directly modify a Molecular Page. They have to contact a maintainer instead


List of cells The distribution of the molecular complex and its components is described within the relevant DopaNet target cells: 
- cortical glutamatergic pyramidal neuron
- mesencephalic dopaminergic neuron
- striatal cholinergic interneuron
- striatal enkephalinergic/GABAergic medium spiny neuron
- striatal substance p/GABAergic medium spiny neuron

--> Species neutral cell types, but description becomes species-specific:

```
<listOfCells>
<cell cellName="mesencephalic dopaminergic neuron" DopaNetontology=" DA:0000702">
<listOfCompartments>
<compartment DopaNetontology="DA:0000137" name="cell soma">
<listOfTranscripts>
<transcript method="single cell RT-PCR" references="17">
<taxon>Rattus norvegicus </taxon>
<description> a4 is present in 100% of
neurons. b2 is probably also present in 100% of neurons.
</description> </transcript>
</listOfTranscripts> </compartment>
</listOfCompartments> </cell> </listOfCells>
```
 DopaNet cellular component vocab- ulary is larger than Gene Ontology one, since it contains the different kinds of neuronal cells (see the Cell Type ontology [24])
24. Cell Type Ontology
[http://obo.sourceforge.net/cgi-bin/detail.cgi?celltype]

--> broken link :( Web archive retrieves it, though: http://web.archive.org/web/20040609173627/http://obo.sourceforge.net/cgi-bin/detail.cgi?celltype . It is indeed CL, byt before its publication!


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q24802073)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q24802073)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q24802073/P921%3BP4510)  
