
Genome-wide atlas of gene expression in the adult mouse brain
=============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q26253934]  

# Highlights

We describe here an anatomically comprehensive digital atlas containing the expression patterns of 20,000 genes in the adult mouse brain.

However, histological data are typically generated for one gene at a time, and data are neither systematically produced and analysed nor consoli- dated in an easily accessible format. Consequently, a limited set of
established cellular markers dominates the current literature, and expression patterns of many genes remain uncharacterized

The Allen Brain Atlas project has taken a global approach to under- standing the genetic structural and cellular architecture ofthe mouse brain by generating a genome-scale collection of cellular resolution gene expression profiles using ISH. Highly

Three-dimensional volumetric representations are created from the reference atlas and the series of ISH images for each gene (Fig. 1).

--> That is _massive_ work

Expressed versus non-expressed genes. Approximately 80% oftotal genes assayed display some cellular expression above background in the brain. This number was equivalently derived through manual scoring and informatics-based analysis using expression thresholds calibrated through expert confirmation. This

To search for ‘housekeeping’ genes necessary for the basal function
of all cells, we examined the genes with the greatest percentage of expressing cells. Although true ubiquity cannot be established with- out a nuclear counter stain, genes with ‘near ubiquity’ can be vali- dated by visual confirmation of expression in essentially all cells relative to Nissl staining. A total of 186 of the top 500 genes showed detectable expression in all cell classes, although very few genes (for example, example, 2610002F03Rik and Fbxo22; Fig. 3) are expressed at high levels in all easily definable cell types (neurons, astrocytes, oligoden- drocytes, choroid plexus, ependymal lining of ventricles and pial surface). A much larger set of genes appears to be expressed in all cells but at very low levels in some cellular populations.

Enriched expression in major cell types. A targeted search for genes enriched in major cell classes with distinctive anatomical localization is enabled by the atlas grid coordinate system superimposed on each gene’s expression pattern. These coordinates enable searches for genes having similar expression patterns to genes of interest. Seeding with oligodendrocyte-specific genes (Mbp, Mobp, Cnp1) returns a large set of oligodendrocyte-enriched genes; seeding with choroid-plexus-enriched genes (Col8a2, Lbp, Msx1) returns a large set of choroid-enriched genes. Where spatial distributions of cell classes overlap greatly, such as for neurons and astrocytes, this strat- egy is less robust but can still be effective. Essentially all well-estab- lished markers for different cell types were identified with these informatics-based methods for prediction followed by expert confirmation.

The Allen Brain Atlas has taken a genomics-style approach to understanding this complex- ity by creating an integrated set of data production and analysis methodologies to systematically produce and analyse a comprehens- ive atlas of gene expression in the adult C57BL/6J mouse brain.


Figure 7 | Heterogeneity of hippocampal gene expression. Classically defined hippocampal subregions (black arrowheads) are delineated by gene expression: a, Wfs1 in CA1; b, Map3k15 in CA2; c, Pvrl3 in CA3.

--> I wonder if I can consider a "region marker" also a "cell of the region" marker. I guess it is okay if I choose to ignore extracelluar RNA and microvesicles.


igure 8 | Cerebellar compartments revealed by gene expression. a, b, Sagittal and coronal views of regional Rasgrf1 expression in the rostral and dorsal granule cell layer (arrows). c–e, Complex regional Opn3 expression in Purkinje cells in anterior (c) and posterior (d) sections. e, Three-dimensional reconstruction ofOpn3 expression reveals sagittal and diagonal bands. Surface rendering of Opn3 expression (purple) is superimposed on a model ofthe granule cell layer (silver) generated from the same brain. Arrowheads mark sagittal bands of Opn3 expression,

--> Super cool patterns!

Cell-type-specific transgenic manipulation using promoters derived from highly specific genes is an obvious next step towards these goals, which will be facilitated by systematic promoter analysis of co-expressed genes to identify the necessary cis-acting regulatory elements44
driving gene expression in
particular cell types. This powerful approach towards cellular char- acterization has demonstrated that promoter-driven transgenes can define cell ‘classes’ with consistent morphology and patterns ofcon- nectivity6,11

--> Connecting transgeny-based cell types to classical morphological analysis.
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q26253934)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q26253934)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q26253934/P921%3BP4510)  
