
Defining cell types and states with single-cell genomics
========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q26782737]  

# Highlights


Human bodies are said to have 210 different types of cells. However, this taxonomy is still bewilderingly diverse.

Perhaps, for example, “CD14+ monocytes” actually consist of multiple subpopulations that share CD14 expression in common. 

In 1957, C.H. Waddington proposed a powerful metaphor for how differentiated cell types emerge from a single, totipotent cell. A dynamical systems view of the cell. A cell’s state at a given time as a point in “gene regulation space.” As the cell regulates gene expression during development, it moves through the space along a trajectory. The central question posed by Waddington is: Where will the cell end up?

Stuart Kauffmann theorized that not only can cell fate transitions be described by a dynamical system, but that what we think of as distinct cell types correspond to attractors of that system (Kauffman 1993). An attractor is a location in the state space of a dynamical system that will move toward and to which it will return if perturbed.

Sui Huang showed that a simple regulatory network with just two genes that inhibit one another but promote their own expression is sufficient to generate a hypothetical landscape with three stable cell fates (Huang et al. 2007).

The cells in a single-cell RNA-seq experiment can often be represented in a space with far fewer than 30,000 dimensions: A dimension for each module of genes. If clustering single cells reveals the attractors of the cell state space, can it also be used to find transition paths between stable states?

Ultimately, most single-cell studies aim to identify and characterize the genes that determine where a cell is in the state space and drive a cell to transition from one state to another. 

# Comments
Super cool figure 1. 


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q26782737)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q26782737)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q26782737/P921%3BP4510)  
