
Implications of Epigenetic Variability within a Cell Population for "Cell Type" Classification
==============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q26770736]  

# Highlights

Here, we propose a new approach to defining nerve “cell types” in reaction to recent advances in single cell analysis.

--> I appreciate the use of quotes.

The model of classifying cells into distinct types thus has to be revised to account for this intrinsic variability. A “cell type” could be a group of cells that possess similar, but not necessarily identical properties, variable within a spectrum of epigenetic adjustments that permit its developmental path toward a specific function to be achieved. Thus, the definition of a cell type is becoming more similar to the definition of a species: sharing essential properties with other members of its group, but permitting a certain amount of deviation in aspects that do not seriously impact function.

We have now observed both variability in gene expression and functional differences in cells that could be considered the same cell type. Understanding cell type classification in the context of these new technologies is a particular challenge for fields that study complex organs with many different cell types, such as neuroscience and immunology. Both disciplines face the daunting task of having to classify cells that may be similar in appearance and that alter gene expression patterns in the course of their normal function

The question then becomes; how do you really know whether two cells are the same ‘‘type’’? If appearance is not the answer, what is?

Because the function of any cell is so dependent on its biochemistry, molecular characterization of cell types appears to be the next logical step.

a dopaminergic neuron must, by definition produce the enzymes necessary for making dopamine, and orexin neurons must produce orexin. By using marker genes, visualization of the cell gives clues to its function. Such a feat is impossible using even the most beautiful Golgi stain. Thus, the signature molecules of a particular neuronal cell type provide a more sophisticated route to cell type classification.

orexin knockout mice (Chemelli et al., 1999) possess lacZ and neomycin resistance cassettes inactivating the orexin gene. Thus, instead ofproducing orexin, they produce β-galactosidase, an enzyme of bacterial origin that is capable of hydrolyzing sugars and turning certain colorless substrates a bright blue color. Despite the fact that the neurons in this mouse produce β-galactosidase and not orexin, they are still classified as ‘‘orexin’’ neurons, not β-galactosidase producing neurons. While on the surface, this point may seem obvious, it reveals that we actually define cell type by function, developmental history, and location, not gene expression by itself.

Thus, the expression of a particular marker cannot by itself define a cell type, as in certain circumstances (e.g., mutations) a cell can still be a particular ‘‘type’’ without expressing the molecule that is crucial for function.

--> Well, that depends on your definition of type! What is a type, after all? A type is what feels like a type? That does not cut it if we are to use computers to parse knowledge.

Thus, while a ‘‘signature’’ DNA methylation profile for a cell type may be derived, it may not always be applicable to individual cells, due to what currently appears to be intrinsic variability.

--> Also, there are cases in which epigenetic markers are retained, but function is changed by post translation mods. 

While certain types of histone modifications are thought to serve as hallmarks of a particular developmental state and/or type—for instance, the so- called ‘‘bi-valent’’ modification are a sign of a progenitor or pluripotent cell—but the relationship between histone modification and gene expression is not straightforward.

Hierarchical clustering would likely help identify the ‘‘natural’’ cell types within populations, and may reveal differences between cell type classification and identifying markers.

--> '"Natural" cell types' is quite strong.

An even more daunting challenge for researchers using
single-cell RNAseq for cell type identification is the question of how gene expression correlates with function, especially given the need to define cell types increasingly by function

--> Definition by function is _so_ slippery.

Additional problems arise when a researcher is using RNAseq to prove that a cell type in vitro is sufficiently similar to an in vivo cell type to perform functional tests, and even more so when the in vivo cell type is not readily available, such as in the case of human neuronal cell types derived from human pluripotent stem cells

--> Yes!

B lymphocyte antigens positive (CD20 or CD19) cells. Notably, CD19 is also expressed on follicular DCs. Even beyond the caveat of non-specificity, these so-called ‘‘marker genes’’ are not all equally crucial for the function of the cell type that they define.

Because immune cells have both active and inactive states, and also multiple states of maturation, there is additional complexity in interpreting gene expression data from these cells.


Thus, while a group of cells with very similar functional properties (i.e., different types of neurons) may be considered different cell types, cells with very distinct molecular profiles (i.e., epithelial stem cells) may be considered to be the same cell type

The functional and molecular properties of cells can
also shift with age, as found in the hematopoetic system.

a precise functional definition makes cell type classification more clear, making it easier to determine whether the molecular variability necessitates classifying certain cells as multiple cell types.

individual neocortical neurons appear to change in neurophysiological properties and dendritic arborization throughout the lifetime of the animal (reviewed in, Jacobs and Scheibel, 2002; Spruston, 2008; Elston and Fujita, 2014), thereby undermining the concept that cortical ‘‘cell types’’ have are functionaly equivalent throughout the lifetime of the animal or in different locations a particular brain region.

ARGUING SIMILARITIES BETWEEN CELL TYPE-LOGIC AND SPECIES-LOGIC


Given the biological complexities of classifying cells, a decision must be made about what sorts of criteria can be reasonably used to distinguish cell types

n evolutionary biology, multiple definitions of species exist, even though the most commonly used is the biological species concept (Futuyma, 1998). As a result, species as defined in one concept will not necessarily be species as defined by another

how do you determine whether the ‘‘cell type’’ identified by RNAseq is a true biological unit? For instance, if one cell expresses c-Fos and another does not, they are still likely to be the same cell type displaying different functional states.

In contrast, the most important definition of a cell is the ability to perform its biological function within the context ofan organism. Therefore, any definition ofa ‘‘cell type’’ must be functionally based.

--> Not really. Of course you can have non-functional definitions of classes of cells. Mqybe not in a toy model where every cell performs a "function" but in real world, intra-cell and intra-individual variability almost claims for non-functional definition if one wants (1) complete definitions and (2) to be consistent.

Cell ‘‘phenotype’’ instead ofcell type? If we were to take a brief
lesson from evolutionary biology, two cells should be classified as the same ‘‘type’’ if and only if they do not have any gene expression/epigenetic differences that interfere with their ability to contribute in a similar manner to the function of the organ in which they are found. Such an approach replaces the idea of a cell ‘‘type’’ with a cell ‘‘phenotype’’

--That excludes totally in vitro analysis (not in any organ!)

In practice, hierarchical classification of distinct cells by gene expression is a first attempt to identify the natural cell type; but like the genealogical species concept, functionality is the ultimate readout. However, the function of each cell within a ‘‘phenotype’’ could be allowed to vary, to some degree (Figure 1). In order to truly determine which cell type a cell belongs to, it is therefore necessary to acquire a deep understanding in the role that genetic variability plays in the function of that cell type

--> Also, functionality changes a lot within a species! There are B cells in your body which might react to antigens for which my cells are completely useless.

For genes whose pattern of expression alters based on aging, it is necessary to assess expression level at multiple time points (Figure 2). Thus, not only the curves of patterns of gene expression, but also functional implications of the observed distribution in gene expression need to be carefully considered in these analyses

For certain transient cell populations that do not persist
into adulthood, such as radial glia, a cell type would have to be considered not only in terms of gene expression, but also in terms of time. If a cell with the complete gene expression pattern and pattern of epigenetic modifications of radial glia were located, for instance, in an adult liver, with no positional cues to allow proper neuron formation, it could be argued that this radial glial cell is merely a ‘‘radial glial-like’’ cell. However, if there would be invented a technical means of introducing such a cell into the embryonic CNS, where it is able to fulfill its function, such a cell would become a radial glial cell

We therefore call for shift of emphasis from static concepts
to dynamic concepts that allow for cell-to-cell variation, while focusing on trajectories that lead cells to develop functional adequacy within the brain (Figure 1).

If cellular function depends in part on location, how do we reconcile it with in vitro culture, particularly the burgeoning field of stem cell modeling of diseases and development?

Based on the theoretical definition of cell phenotype
advanced in the present discussion, in vitro cultured cells can never be considered the same cell type as cells in vivo; but they can still serve as functional models

--> Nice, consistent! 

Paradoxically, a refusal to qualify the in vitro cell types as identical to ‘‘natural,’’ in vivo cell types would make them more useful. Assuming that the in vitro cells are able to functionally model at least some of the properties of their biological counterparts, multiple systems for in vitro modeling may be more useful than attempts to come up with cells that perfectly models the ‘‘natural’’ cell types.

--> I agree so much!


It is important for us to remember that a cell type is by itself an artificial distinction, created for the convenience of biologists, much in the same way as the concept of a species is created for us to distinguish between animals. As finer and finer gradations of cellular state become available, it may be tempting to classify each transient event as an indication of permanent, fundamental difference between two cell populations. As ways to measure minute differences between cells become more and more sensitive, a continuous engagement with the concept of cell type will become of paramount importance so that cells can be appropriately classified and studied.

--> Interesting, I really need to talk more to her

However, this ‘‘cell type’’ concept has sometimes fallen prey to a fallacy of false equivalence. That is, this conventional model of cell equivalence has been recently undermined by advances in single- cell gene expression, lineage tracing, and genome sequencing.

We have suggested that a ‘‘cell type’’ could now be defined as a group of cells that possess similar, though not identical, functional properties, variable within a spectrum of epigenetic adjustments that, most importantly, permit its biologically adaptive developmental path, resulting in a functionally equivalent class of cells, to be achieved.

Our thinking implies new methodological challenges even as
it offers definitional clarity for the cell biology of neurons during development
# Comments

Nice compilation of the issues regarding current concepts, thorough review and nice perspective.

An article to read again in the future.

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q26770736)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q26770736)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q26770736/P921%3BP4510)  
