
Interneuron cell types are fit to function
==========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q27021885]  

# Highlights
Interneuron diversity was often treated either as a quasi continuum or a diversity space with cell types numbering potentially in the hundreds.

Figure 1 | Multiple dimensions of interneuron diversity. Interneuron cell types are usually defined using a combination of criteria based on morphology, connectivity pattern, synaptic properties, marker expression and intrinsic firing properties. The highlighted connections define fast-spiking cortical basket cells.
analysis

Figure 2 | Interneuron subtypes are generated from discrete proliferative regions within the subpallium. The

--> Interesting lexical jump from "interneurons of different subtypes" to "interneuron subtypes".

If the goal were simply to account for the neuronal markers that have conventionally been used to categorize interneurons, then a mere six (PV, SST, VIP, nitric oxide synthase, reelin and calretinin) could divide most interneurons within the forebrain. But clearly such a classi- fication would belie the regional complexity of interneurons. Within

A prediction of our model is that the developmental genetic programs functioning in interneuron progenitors lead to the production of a relatively small number of cardinal subclasses. We believe that the much larger diversity of interneurons observed in mature brain circuits reflects later refine- ments imposed locally on specific subclasses. If this were true, it would predict that interneurons from the same cardinal class would, within the same circuit, be exposed to similar cues and hence develop similar functional properties

--> A "cardinal class." Nice wording.

Historically, models of cortical function have focused on circuit
motifs, repeated patterns of connectivity, to infer computational func- tion for specific cell types.

It has become clear that there are at least as many inhibitory circuit motifs as there are cell types.

--> Maybe by definition.

SST-expressing cortical Martinotti neurons are dendritic-targeting interneurons that project to layer 1 of the cerebral cortex and provide inhibition to the tufts of deep-layer pyramidal cells.

Recent results have shown that two major
interneuron types have opposing functions: neurogliaform cells inhibit layer 2/3 pyramids, whereas single bouquet cells inhibit other interneurons within layer 2/3, and may provide disinhibition in vivo.

--> Direct assertions that can be semantically represented

the observations that genetically defined interneuron classes show similar recruitment suggests they do act as functional units, supporting the existence of a small number of cardinal interneuron types.

In this Review, we suggest that the large diversity in interneuron classes may originate from a handful of cardinal cell types. Such an assertion could be misinterpreted as a statement claiming that interneuron classes are not diverse or that divisions into further subtypes are not warranted. The incredible work in areas such as the hippocampus shows us that this is patently incorrect. We have provided a framework that we hope will help to direct future studies by consolidating interneuron diversity into cardi- nal classes with specific ground states.

--> The "cardinal classes with specific ground states" resounds with the idea of a perenial, non-fugacious type (an "identity" if you will)

In short, we may ultimately find that interneurons exist as cardinal classes because nature has conspired to bestow on them generalized computa- tional function that necessitated the presence of common biophysical and hodological properties. Despite these commonalities, it is self-evident that neural circuits allow for a remarkable array of behavioural outcomes. Harnessing biology’s ability to use a limited set of building blocks, to cre- ate enormous diversity circuits holds the real promise that we may soon begin to understand the means by which brain circuits self-assemble and initiate function. 

--> Interesting perspective, on a core "parts list" with malleable parts, and change in a variety of ways to built

Ascoli, G. A. et al. Petilla terminology: nomenclature of features of GABAergic interneurons of the cerebral cortex. Nature Rev. Neurosci. 9, 557–568 (2008). This is the best effort to date by physiologists, anatomists and developmental neurobiologists to come to a common nomenclature for GABAergic interneurons

--> Nice note. 
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q27021885)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q27021885)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q27021885/P921%3BP4510)  
