
What Is it Like to Be a Bat?
============================
  
  [@wikidata:Q2703462]  

# Highlights

Philosophers share the general human weakness for explanations of what is incomprehensible in terms suited for what is familiar and well understood, though entirely different. 

No doubt it occurs in countless forms totally unimaginable to us, on other planets in other solar systems throughout the universe.

--> A little too extreme, perhaps.

I have chosen bats instead of wasps or flounders because if one travels too far down the phylogenetic tree, people gradually shed their faith that there is experience there at all.

--> Apesar de haver correlação, as experiencias subjetivas da humanidade não são pautadas pela filogenia, e pela cladística. Se algo influencia é a fenética, e relações taximétricas. 

But bat sonar, though clearly a form of perception, is not similar in its operation to any sense that we possess, and there is no reason to suppose that it is subjectively like anything we can experience or imagine.  By "our own case" I do not mean just "my own case," but rather the mentalistic ideas that we apply unproblematically to ourselves and other human beings.


I can imagine this (which is not very far), it tells me only what it would be like for me to behave as a bat behaves. But that is not the question. I want to know what it is like for a bat to be a bat.

We cannot form more than a schematic conception of what it is like. For example, we may ascribe general types of experience on the basis of the animal's structure and behavior.

only certain general types of mental state could be ,ascribed to us (perhaps perception and appetite would be concepts common to us both; perhaps not)

Certainly it is possible for a human being to believe that there are facts which humans never will possess the requisite concepts to represent or comprehend. Indeed, it would be foolish to doubt this, given the finiteness of humanity's expectations. After all, there would have been transfinite numbers even if everyone had been wiped out by the Black Death before Cantor discovered them. But one might also believe that there are facts which could not ever be represented or comprehended by human beings, even if the species lasted forever.

It may be easier than I suppose to transcend inter-species barriers with the
aid of the imagination. For example, blind people are able to detect objects near them by a form of sonar, using vocal clicks or taps of a cane. Perhaps if one knew what that was like, one could by extension imagine roughly what it was like to possess the much more refined sonar of a bat

. Lightning has an objective character that is not exhausted by its visual appearance, and this can be investigated by a Martian without vision. To be precise, it has a more objective character than is revealed in its visual appearance. 

The reduction can succeed only if the species-specific viewpoint is omitted from what is to be reduced

--> Why is the point of view species-specific?

Setting aside temporarily the relation between the mind and the brain, we can pursue a more objective understanding of the mental in its own right.

But whether or not this guess is correct, it seems unlikely that any physical theory of mind can be contemplated until more thought has been given to the general problem of sub- jective and objective. 

--> Temos bastante desenvolvimento nisso nos últimos anos.



# Comments
But do we even _know_ what is like to be a human?