
Towards the automatic classification of neurons
===============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q27010194]  

# Highlights

Neuronal type classification is an increasingly hot topic, but its history began with neuroscience itself [1]. Researchers routinely refer to pyramidal, stellate, granule, bipolar, or basket cells, but these names are often insufficient to de- scribe neuronal diversity even within limited brain areas. Realizing this issue, both the European Human Brain Proj- ect and the American BRAIN initiatives identified cell type classification among their first priorities [2,3]: ‘to complete a comprehensive cell census of the human brain’.

Much as ‘parts lists’ precede ‘exploded diagrams’ in assembly-kit manuals, the objective identification of neu- ronal types is essential to understanding their functional interactions [30–32].

--> Always this parts list view... It works kind of well for vital organs, but not so much for cell types. 

The term ‘classification’ is often used with two related but distinct meanings when referring to neuronal types. In the narrower sense, neuronal classification is the process of dividing a group of neurons into known classes, as exem- plified by the task of distinguishing between excitatory and inhibitory cells. The second usage of the term encompasses the above classification proper as well as the identification of the classes themselves, a step sometime referred to as categorization. This broader connotation implies the definition of distinct neuronal types and the simultaneous assignment of neurons to each type.

--> Good cut. The second usage is the one we see in scRNA-seq all the time.


Initial attempts to produce general neuronal hierar- chies based on morphological properties [38], however, gained limited traction.

Automatic classification of somatostatin-expressing interneurons, using 19 physiological features from 36 cells and in parallel 67 morphological features from 39 cells, independently identified three neuronal types: Martinotti cells and two other groups with short asymmetric axons targeting layers 2/3 and bending medially [11]. Although morphological reconstructions and electrophysiological recordings were jointly available for only 16 cells, classifi- cation results were consistent across domains.

A common question in neuronal classification regards the minimum sample size to reliably reveal distinct types.

--> This question is poorly formulated. The minimum sample size is one of multiple variables to identify sensu stricto cell types. 

Determining the optimal sample for neuronal classification is not only a matter of size. Given the strong (if still largely unknown) inter-dependence of neuronal morphol- ogy, physiology, and biochemistry (e.g., [83,84]), charac- terizing a smaller sample of neurons across different domains may be more conducive to discovery than sepa- rately collecting the same measurements from each of three larger neuronal samples. Nevertheless, 21 of 27 classification studies summarized in Table 1 used single experimental domains, and only one dataset com- bined all three major dimensions [9,18]. The few suc- cesses in automatically inducing neuronal prototypes in one domain [12,19] have yet to be extended to global classification algorithms combining structural, electrical, and molecular information [85]

Neuronal classification evolved from its descriptive ori-
gin to modern quantitative analysis, but the field remains fraught with the classic dilemma between lumpers and splitters [107].

--> 1st: That is mostly a single-inheritance framework, which just doesn't cut. 2nd no need for a dilemma of that kind when we have computers and ontologies. 


On the one hand, all neurons share common properties that distinguish them from non-neural cells, and can thus be aptly considered as a single class. On the other, no two neurons are ever identical; therefore each neuron could be viewed as its own class. Although these extremes shed no light on neuronal identity, they illustrate the complementary advantages and disadvantages of sim- pler (but generic) versus specific (but complex) classifica- tions [108]. For example, somatic location can be defined at a coarser anatomical level (cortical, retinal, spinal, cere- bellar, etc.) or with a finer-grained distinction of subregions and layers. Similar choices apply to morphological, physi- ological, and biochemical characterization (Figure 3). Even approaches that assume structured continuous distribu- tions of neuronal characteristics need to set the granularity which eventually defines neuronal archetypes [18]. Is there a ‘right number’ of neuronal types?

--> Interesting use of "archetype", though different conceptually from my archetype.

Existing neuroscience knowledge is still far from sufficient to satisfactorily attempt closure on neuronal classification.

How many types of neurons are there? Quantitative criteria, such as the Bayesian information criterion, may provide an objective answer by identifying the granularity with the best explanatory power for the available data.
?

--> How can one expect to answer that without a pragmatic definition of cell type?

Can neuron types be described by a consistent taxonomical hierarchy? A hierarchical organization implies ranking the classi- fication relevance of available measurements based on under- lying functions and mechanisms (connectivity, signal transmission, information processing, plasticity, etc.).

--> Resounding yes, but only if the neuron types follow the rules that we outlined

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q27010194)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q27010194)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q27010194/P921%3BP4510)  
