
CD16 is indispensable for antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity by human monocytes
=====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q27341786]  
  
Publication date : 27 of September, 2016  

# Highlights

Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) is exerted by immune cells expressing surface Fcγreceptors (FcγRs) against cells coated with antibody, such as virus-infected or transformed cells. CD16, the FcγRIIIA, is essential for ADCC by NK cells, 

 Monocytes lacking CD16 did not exert ADCC but acquired this property after CD16 expression was induced by either cytokine stimulation or transient transfection. 

 NK cells are considered to be the main mediators of ADCC both in physiological and therapeutic settings.

 Figure 1.CD16+ but not the CD16− monocytes are able to perform ADCC on therapeutic antibody–coated tumour and virus-infected cell lines

 Figure 2.CD16+ monocytes from healthy individuals are able to perform ADCC on Rtx-coated primary B leukemic cells. ADCC by CD16+ monocytes from three healthy individuals on primary B leukaemic cells isolated from thr

 --> a few dynamite plots, but data seems good.

 CD16− monocytes did not exert ADCC. We assessed whether enforced CD16 expression would induce ADCC capacity. Treatment of CD16− monocytes with M-CSF, TGF-β or IL-10, previously reported to induce surface expression of CD16.

 These data indicated that interaction of CD16+  monocytes with antibody-coated target cells induced their production of TNFα, which in turn binds to TNFR-expressing target cells to promote their cell death via a TNFα-mediated  mechanism.

 Our data show that the human blood monocyte subsets that express CD16 possess the capacity to exert ADCC on cell lines, primary tumor cells and virally infected cell.

  Moreover, we have shown the potential for human CD16+ monocytes to be effective mediators of ADCC against a range of cell types in vitro and there-fore exploration of ways to exploit this potential in vivo could prove valuable in the clinical setting.

  
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q27341786)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q27341786)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q27341786/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q27341786&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/SREP34310)  
