
Minimum information about a microarray experiment (MIAME)-toward standards for microarray data
==============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q27860569]  
  
Publication date : 01 of December, 2001  

# Highlights

 The ultimate goal of this work is to establish astandard for recording and reporting microarray-based gene expression data, which will in turn facil-itate the establishment of databases and public repositories and enable the development of data analy-sis tools. With respect to MIAME, we concentrate on defining the content and structure of the necessaryinformation rather than the technical format for capturing it.

 Fig. 1Conceptual view of gene expression data. The model has three parts: (i)gene annotation, which may be given as links to gene sequence databases, (ii)sample annotation, for which there currently are no public external databases(except  the  species  taxonomy)  and  (iii)  the  gene  expression  matrix,  in  whicheach position contains information characterizing the expression of a particu-lar gene in a particular sample.

 The precise nature of the information to be stored will be dic-tated by the function of the particular database or repository. Ifthe unique goal of the database is to archive supporting data forpublished  experiments,  it  can  be  assumed  that  the  publicationsthemselves  will  provide  information  explaining  the  databaseentries.

There are at least three levels of data relevant to a microarrayexperiment: (i) the scanned images (raw data); (ii) the quantita-tive  outputs  from  the  image  analysis  procedure  (microarrayquantitation matrices); and (iii) the derived measurements (geneexpression data matrices; Fig. 2)


Unfortunately,  such  resources  are  not  available  formany other types of sample annotation, particularly those specificfor individual species, such as ‘developmental stage’ (see the MGEDOntology  Working  Group  home  page  for  reference).

 As the majority of the necessarycontrolled  vocabularies  do  not  exist,  the  MIAME  definitionincludes lists of ‘qualifier, value, source’ triplets, which authorscan use to define their own qualifiers and provide the appropri-ate values. For instance:qualifier: cell typevalue: epithelialsource: Gray’s anatomy (38th ed.)orqualifier: treatmentvalue: 15′heat shocksource: Smith and Jones, Nature Genet.(1992)

 he  minimum  information  about  a  published  microarray-based  gene  expression  experiment  includes  a  description  of  thefollowing six sections:
 1.    Experimental design: the set of hybridization experimentsas a whole
 2.    2.    Array  design:  each  array  used  and  each  element  (spot,feature) on the array
 3.    3.    Samples: samples used, extract preparation and labeling
 4.    4.    Hybridizations: procedures and parameters
 5.    5.    Measurements: images, quantification and specifications
 6.    6.    Normalization controls: types, values and specifications
 
 Our goal is to develop a standard that can serve both research sci-entists  and  software  developers.  To  that  end,  we  hope  that  thisdescription  will  stimulate  discussion  of  the  proposed  MIAMEstandards and we encourage the microarray community, as wellas the general research community, to provide us with their viewson  how  this  standard  can  be  improved.  For  this  purpose  an  e-mail discussion group has been set up by MGED consortium (tojoin, see http://www.mged.org)

 We  pose  several  questions  to  the  research  community.  Is  thecurrent  MIAME  draft  sufficiently  detailed  to  capture  the  infor-mation needed to analyze and evaluate microarray data? If not,what  is  missing?  Or  is  MIAME  already  too  extensive,  requiringspecific details that are unlikely to ever be exploited; if so, what issuperfluous? 

Our  hope  is  thatsuch an approach becomes the norm by which data presenta-tion and publication standards are developed in the future. Assuch,  we  look  forward  to  hearing  comments  and  suggestionsfrom the general research community.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q27860569)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q27860569)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q27860569/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q27860569&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/NG1201-365)  
