
Are Platelets Cells? And if Yes, are They Immune Cells?
=======================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28083403]  

# Highlights

Small fragments circulating in the blood were formally identified by the end of the nineteenth century, and it was suggested that they assisted coagulation via interactions with vessel endothelia. Wright, at the beginning of the twentieth century, identified their bonemarrow origin. For long, platelets have been considered sticky assistants of hemostasis and pollutants of blood or tissue samples; they were just cell fragments. 

 Some gladly categorized platelets as cells but they were certainly not fully licensed
as such for cell physiologists. Actually, platelets possess almost every characteristic of
cells, apart from being capable of organizing their genes: they have neither a nucleus nor
genes.This view prevailed until it became evident that platelets play a role in homeostasis
and interact with cells other than with vascular endothelial cells; then began the era of
physiological and also pathological inflammation. Platelets have now entered the field of
immunity as inflammatory cells. Does assistance to immune cells itself suffice to license
a cell as an “immune cell”? Platelets prove capable of sensing different types of signals
and organizing an appropriate response. Many cells can do that


 In combination, these properties argue in favor of allowing platelets the
title of immune cells

It has become usual in the medicine and physiology community to
present platelets as “cells” that are indispensable to primary hemostasis (their function in thrombosis is sometimes ignored); but still
today, it is not uncommon that representatives of the pathologist
community refute use of the word “cells” for platelets. Platelets, for
many, are dust or pollutants at worse, and cell debris at best, though
no one doubts their hemostatic functions. Two distinct arguments
may be considered in an attempt to explain their reluctance to
recognize platelets as cells:

1. Ex vivo, platelets usually “contaminate” histological preparations; because they have no nucleus and they apparently are
“solely” cytoplasm fractions, and platelets differ from cells
forming tissues and also from the regular blood cells: they
resemble impurities.

2. In vivo, platelet “puree,” and not mandatorily fresh, alive,
platelets within platelet components (PCs) for transfusion purposes, can also achieve hemostasis in emergency conditions and
stop bleeding. This is how a large proportion of thawed PCs [a
type of blood component (BC) rarely used] behaves.

--> "liver extract" also has metabolic activity, but hepatocytes are consensual types

van Leewenhoek, the Dutch microscopist who delivered amazing, seminal observations of natural life, reported precise observations of platelets around 1675. Hewson (around 1780) reported undefined blood particles. At that time, platelets bore names such
as particles, corpuscles, and globules.

WHY ARE PLATELETS SOMETIMES NOT RECOGNIZED AS
CELLS?

Platelets are non-nucleated cell elements that, clearly, result from
fractionation of bone marrow megakaryocytes (MKs). During differentiation, MKs are exposed to constantly increasing pH and
pO2 until reaching the sinuses, where platelets are released from
proplatelets supported by shear from the blood flow

As such, platelets contain (inherit) MK cytoplasm complete
with granules, mitochondria, and mRNA. Indeed, anucleate
platelets lack genomic DNA but inherit a diverse array of functional coding or non-coding RNAs and translational machinery
from their parent cells, enabling activated platelets to synthesize
proteins, which suggests the possibility of post transcriptional
gene regulation in platelets

What about comparison with erythrocytes? Erythrocytes are
not denied the qualification of cells though they have neither
a nucleus nor genes to reorganize. However, the non-nucleated
status of erythrocytes only pertains to mammals, not birds or
reptiles. Erythrocytes in mammals evolved from erythroblasts,
which are nucleated, and the process of enucleation is finite: one
nucleated erythroblast gives rise to one erythrocyte with no intermediate division or transformation (10, 11). MKs, when forced
to terminal maturation, separate into a degraded nucleus and
platelets, emphasizing the nature of platelets, which are “only”
cytoplasm fragments.

-->  2.4 Are human erythrocytes "cells" because bird erythrocytes are "cells"? That is a curious argument format.

It has,
however, recently been shown that there is a modest but definite
thrombopoiesis in the circulation, as platelets give rise themselves to buds and extrusions distinct from platelet micro-particles
(PMPs), turning into pro- and then pre-platelets (5–8, 18, 19).
This is not a characteristic of a cell fragment without autonomy.
This is, if further evidence is needed, a very strong argument
in favor of platelets’ classification as cells.

microparticles (MPs). PMPs are phospholipid vesicles
(100–1000 nm) released after budding from the platelet plasma
membrane. Platelets shed these membrane vesicles after stimulation with physiological agonists such as thrombin or collagen,
in response to high shear stress (e.g., in severe stenosis) or in the
presence of danger signals. As a result, PMP express the same antigens as their parent cells, i.e., GPIIb–IIIa, GPIb, CD31, CD61, and
CD62P. This distinguishes them from MPs derived from other cell
types (red blood cells, leukocytes, monocytes, endothelial cells).
PMPs thus make up between 70 and 90% of the circulating vesicles. PMPs differ from exosomes by their size, and also due to the
fact that they are not derived from exocytosis of multivesicular
bodies (20–24)

--> exosomes are also on the boundary of the concept of "cell"


PLATELETS BEHAVE AS CELLS

--> And bots behave as humans
--> Next section relevant for tag 1.4.4

1. Platelets display receptors for a variety of moieties,
2. Platelets can respond to soluble molecules
3. Platelets comprise a complete and functional signalosome.
4. Platelets are docked with proteins/GPs for several, and distinct, purposes, including hemostasis, thrombosis, sensing, natural anti-infection (bacterial, viral, perhaps fungal) defense, chemo-attraction, cell communication, angiogenesis, healing, and tissue repair
5.  Platelets can bind pathogens. Platelets can sense infectious
pathogens and in certain occasion bind to them,
6.  For reasons yet unclear, some infectious pathogens can enter platelets and at least reside in them. 
7.   Platelets have one of the shortest lifespan among all human
cells (only certain epithelial cells are comparable to them, if one
excepts the granulocytes, which dye shortly from functioning
as phagocytes): this property has probably contributed to deny
the “cellularity” of platelets


What are “immune cells”? There is neither clear nor definite definition of an immune cell. 


The issue of platelets as “immune” cells has thus been not only
endorsed but also extensively covered recently in a number of
excellent review articles (33, 48, 88–90); therefore, we present only
a brief overview and select three representative issues to address
the question of platelet cellularity.

1. Platelets are innate immune sensors.
2. Doing so, the platelets initiate inflammation
3. Platelets assist innate immunity and affect adaptive immune
cells

There is no longer doubt that platelets are cells. They are also
“intelligent” in that they are capable of discriminating between
several types of danger and of adjusting a secretory response. This
response is in general, physiologically, only that which is needed to
face the danger or to fix a limited insult. This is indeed a platelet’s
usual function, and what they do when they repair daily the vascular endothelium that they patrol is detect cracks and erosions,
and prevent breaches and leakage (bleeding).

# Comments

What is a cell to me? Well it is whatever a scientist reasonably argues is a cell and gets 3 independent to vouch for it. 

## Tags
2.3

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28083403)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28083403)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28083403/P921%3BP4510)  
