
Text mining resources for the life sciences.
============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28076577]  
  
Publication date : 25 of November, 2016  

# Highlights

. We categorize the various resources under three sections: Content Discovery looks at where and how to find biomedical publications for text mining; Knowledge Encoding describes the formats used to represent the different levels of information associated with content that enable text mining, including those formats used to carry such information between processes; Tools and Services gives an overview of workflow management systems 

Where should I look for resources? How should I assemble and manage my TM workflows? How should I encode and store their output?

We have placed a high focus on interoperability throughout this report, suggesting where and when interoperable resources can be used. Interoperability is not appropriate for every task, but we take the view that in these cases the user should know about the interoperable options and make a conscious choice.


etadata schemata are not enough for comprehensive description of resources, as we also need to know what particular fields mean. For example, different metadata schemata for scientific articles may include a field called ‘subject’, or ‘domain’ but this raises questions: Are ‘subject’ and ‘domain’ intended to codify the same information? Are the values for these fields provided freely by the authors, or do they have to be selected from a controlled vocabulary or an ontology? Such questions are usually addressed when designing application profiles where inter alia vocabularies and/or ontologies associated with particular fields are specified. The resources in Table 3, mainly controlled vocabularies, authority lists and ontologies, are presented because they are used widely and can be useful for improving existing schemata in recording information. 


The Semantic Web for Research Communities (SWRC) is a generic ontology for modelling entities of research communities such as persons, organizations, publications and their relationships (26),

--> Cool that that exists


ome words represent structural elements of a document (headers, chapters, sections and paragraphs) or a sentence (subject, predicate and adjective). Others play special roles, such as URL address, name of a person or citation. Finally, some words or their sequences may be names of concepts that are interesting for a particular purpose. We typically refer to the identification of these special roles as annotating and the identified words, with their labels, as annotations. These may be obvious for a human reader, but need to be expressed in a strict machine-readable format to allow automatic text processing.

--> Good abstraction for  3.2.3. Text mining and Wikidata community curation

However, to create linked data, the target knowledge resource needs to be suitable for referencing, which can be ensured by using one of several suitable interoperable formats. The ‘Formats for knowledge resources’ section enumerates the most popular formats for encoding such resources, while the ‘Useful knowledge resources’ describes exemplar ontologies and vocabularies.

Creating an annotated corpus or knowledge resource, in particular when done manually, is a time consuming process. The products of such efforts are sometimes used for many years, but they also may become inaccessible if an under-sperified or poorly documented format has been employed


Table 5.

A comparison of annotation formats used in TM

Open Annotationj 	Generic 	RDF 	No 	Stand-off 

Some of these models were designed by a committee of language annotation professionals, who attempts to cover the widest range of annotation situations in order to build a complete and expressive format. LAF (36), XMI15, and Open Annotation (37) are examples of models designed with this goal in mind.

--> Damn, too many models. I am going to use OA, it seems to have the best general support

Although it is not possible to enumerate all knowledge sources used for TM and biocuration, we try to outline several examples here, focusing on their interoperability. We have focused on resources from the life sciences domain, but at the end of this section the reader will find some more general examples with an explanation of their role in text mining for biocuration. Table 7 describes the resources we have highlighted, including their most important features. 

--> Nice list. They should all be integrated to Wikidata. It is a shame that none of them are CC0. 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28076577)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28076577)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28076577/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q28076577&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
