
The application of computers to taxonomy
========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28181838]  

# Highlights

A method is described for handling large quantities of taxonomic data by an electronic computer so as to yield the outline of a classification based on equally weighted features. This enables Similarity to be expressed numerically.

Secondly, that overall similarity was the basic concept of such ideal classifications and that it is measured in terms of the number of similar features possessed by two organisms. Thirdly, that every feature should have equal weight. Fourthly, that division into taxonomic groups is made upon correlated features. Classifications based on the last three principles (which may for brevity be called Adansonian classifications) will contain the greatest content of information.

If one accepts the thesis that the ideal scientific classification is the one
which contains in its divisions the greatest amount of information, then one may logically define the word feature in terms of the number of statements which can be made about an organism.

To be counted the statement must be based on observed data and not merely assumed, otherwise it leads to circular reasoning of the kind ‘I assume this creature has a mammalian heart and therefore the nature of its heart supports my contention that it is a mammal’.
--> This is very important for cell type classification! Currently the Cell Ontology contains a number of such assumptions. 


If two organisms both possess the same positive feature this counts as one similarity; if one pos- sesses it and the other does not this counts as one difference; if neither possess it this does not count at all.

--> Interesting. Taking genes as features this can be readily applied.

One should not introduce deliberate additional bias by using a test which was selected because it readily separates the group of organisms under study. Neglect of this could (in theory) lead to ridiculous results.

--> Looks like what people do nowadays for cell types, in a complex way that envolves clustering, but still. 

The two groups of Chromobactmium, groups a and b which have been considered by most authors including myself (Sneath, 1956~~ b) to con- stitute two species within one genus, are as distantly related as Pseudomonas is to Serrutia which are usually regarded as belonging to different families.

It seems to me that bacteriologists are apt to assume that two bacteria
which differ in a striking feature such as their pigment are also different in many other uninvestigated features, and that this is the reason why Chromo- bacterium, Pseudomonas and Serratia are considered to be distantly related. But this assumption is quite unproved

--> This is _exactly_ the same for cell types.

Probably the most controversial point in the method described here is the dictum that every feature should have equal weight. This is, however, not a matter for experimental proof; it is for taxonomists to decide whether they want the kind of classification which is given by equally weighted features.

In bacteriology our criteria for taxonomic rank are so poor that a great simplification would result from basing rank upon Similarity, as expressed by S.

Admittedly, a shrewd taxonomist might make a better estimate by guessing, but much of present-day bacterial taxonomy is an art based on guesswork, conscious or unconscious, and the results have not been encouraging.

The analysis is intended to produce taxonomic groups and not to identify the groups.

--> Super mixed in current cell type taxonomy. 

For bacteria and viruses the method could be widely used, but it would mean that workers would have to study a few strains at a time very thoroughly and build up the classification piece by piece. It would be ' classification from below' (White, 1937), and though slow it would, I believe, be sure.

# Comments
