
Ontological realism: A methodology for coordinated evolution of scientific ontologies
=====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28239464]  
  
Publication date : 15 of November, 2010  

# Highlights
At the same time he
assails the methodology on philosophical grounds, focusing specifically on our recommendation
that ontologies developed for scientific purposes should be constructed in such a way that their
terms are seen as referring to what we call universals or types in reality

However, it nonetheless provides us with a valuable opportunity to clarify the realist methodology, and to
show how some of its principles are being applied, especially within the framework of the OBO
(Open Biomedical Ontologies) Foundry initiative.

--> - 1.3.1. OBO Foundry and biomedical ontologies

The realist methodology is based on the idea that the most effective way to ensure mutual
consistency of ontologies over time and to ensure that ontologies are maintained in such a
way as to keep pace with advances in empirical research is to view ontologies as
representations of the reality that is described by science. This is the fundamental principle
of ontological realism.

--> - 1.2.1. Descriptional logic and its historical context

Different forms of realism are distinguished by philosophers, of which the most important
for our purposes here are:

Scientific realism =def. the doctrine according to which scientific theories are (broadly)
true of reality.
Metaphysical realism =def. the doctrine according to which universals or types exist in
reality


Because ontological realism is a methodology, and not a doctrine, it stands in no logical relation to any of the
metaphysical doctrines specified abovee. Certainly it takes over the terminology of ‘types’,
‘universals’, ‘instantiation’ from the metaphysical realist literature; but it does not stand or
fall according to whether universals or types do or do not exist in some metaphysical sense,
and our goal will be to provide a specification of our methodology which will allow even
anti-realists to recognize its benefits.

Computers, however,
are much less tolerant of classificatory inconsistency, and this can cause problems when
computers are put to work in managing large and heterogeneous bodies of data.

Scientists are constantly drawing on this distinction as they move back and forth between
descriptions of experiments on the one hand, where they are dealing with carefully
demarcated collections of particulars (for example, populations of study organisms), and the
formulation of results in theories on the other hand, where they can be seen as dealing with
corresponding types.


Ontologists, when building ontologies,
should conceive the world as including entities of two sorts – called ‘particulars’ (or
‘instances’) and ‘types’ (or ‘universals’)

Particulars are concrete
individual entities (entities that exist in space and time and that exist only once); types or
universals are to be understood as repeatable
 --> - 1.2.1.1 Multi-level theory (MLT)

Whether scientists themselves see the general terms they use as referring to types (or
universals or natural kinds or like entities) is not relevant to the success of our methodology.
All that is important is that scientists use general terms in attempting to describe repeatable
features of reality

--> Core!

 This is because even the metaphysical anti-realist can, we believe,
view all putative references to types or universals – including the many such putative
references in what follows – as mere façons de parler about other, more commonplace
entities – such as scientists’ beliefs or linguistic usage – and still gain full practical
advantage from our methodology

. Similarly, the scientific debate over whether
there exists something that is properly to be called a ‘race’ can be formulated in terms of
whether ‘race’ should be understood as denoting a universal or a mere collection.

When scientists attempt to detect the Higgs boson (Abazov et al., 2010) they are seeking,
first of all, to detect certain particulars – individual things that exist (albeit in some merely
probabilistic sense) in space and time. But they are not, of course, seeking to detect just any
particulars. Rather, they are seeking particulars that are similar to each other in the sense that
they are, again, instances of a corresponding type.

Reference ontology principle:

Second,
it is a normative principle having the nature of a conditional recommendation: if you wish to
create what we call a ‘reference ontology’, then you should conceive what you are doing in
such and such a way. The principle speaks not at all to those who wish to create information
artifacts of other sorts.

Note also that ‘settled’ does not mean: known to be true. Settled science comes closer,
rather, to what (Kuhn, 1970) refers to as normal science. 

This privilege reflects in part a simple homesteader effect; since ontology is so new, there
are many fields thus far not ontologically tilled. The first in the field in any given area
acquires certain presumptive rights.

Principle of asserted single inheritance. Each reference ontology module should be
built as an asserted monohierarchy (a hierarchy in which each term has at most one
parent).

--> hm, intuitively I don't like that. Let's see. 

Rector (2003) has developed a methodology for ‘normalizing’ ontologies by decomposing
existing polyhierarchies into homogeneous disjoint monohierarchies. For him, the
monohierarchies are then recombined using logical definitions from which an enriched polyhierarchy can be inferred mechanically using a theorem prover or reasoner.

--> Oh, ok, of course, entitles a reasoner. Maybe reasoners crash because they know _too much_. Perhaps extensive assertion provides a heuristic filtering for useful assertions.  

BFO has also been subjected to thorough tests of its serviceability as an upper level ontology for
scientific purposes by the members of the OBI (Ontology for Biomedical Investigations)
Consortium, and by users and critics such as Thomas Bittner, Maureen Donnelly and
Randall Dipert (Buffalo), Mathias Brochhausen (IFOMIS), Lawrence Hunter and Mike
Bada (Denver), Chris Mungall (Berkeley), Fabian Neuhaus (NIST), Bjoern Peters (San
Diego), Alan Ruttenberg (Buffalo), Holger Stenzhorn (IFOMIS, Saarland University) and
Kerry Trentelman (Buffalo),

For any given settled science the set of candidate terms in this respect is broadly understood
and accepted by the scientists involved. The problem is that this set is typically too large for
the purposes of coordinated ontology development.

The inclusion of a representation of a universal in the GO requires that at least one realworld instance of this universal has been shown experimentally to have existed. 

Principle of instantiation: A term should be included in a reference ontology only if
there is experimental evidence that instances to which that term refers exist in reality.


--> Nice! Very important point, which I use in full for - 2.4 The concept of "cell type" and  - 2.4.4. A pragmatic definition of cell type

Each reference ontology, if our strategy is successful, will, like the GO, serve as an attractor
for multiple expanding groups of users whose members will have strong incentives not only
to invest resources directed toward ensuring that it is developed and used in ways that keep
pace with scientific advance, but also to recommend it to other users – since this will
increase the value of their own investment
. In this way, we believe, we have a strategy
which can avoid recreating through ontology proliferation the very silo effects to which
ontologies themselves were originally conceived as the antidote (Smith, 2008). We know of
no other approach to ontology development of which an analogous claim can be made.

We have used the word ‘type’ in the above side by side with the word ‘universal’. The use
of ‘type’ reflects an effort on our part to be responsive to the needs of specific communities
of readers.

Minimal terminological baggage principle: When working in a multidisciplinary field
such as ontology, avoid the use of technical terms that have multiple conflicting
technical uses in the constituent disciplines involved.

--> Very interesting principle. Definitely applies to "cell type" 

It is with the aim of conforming to this principle that we try to avoid in our presentations of
the ontological realist methodology also terms such as ‘class’, ‘property’, ‘model’,
‘semantics’, ‘thing’ and of course ‘concept’ (Smith, 2004).

Our own ideas on universals derive from our study of the work of Edmund Husserl, whose
Logical Investigations contains the first use of the term ‘formal ontology’ (Husserl, 1913/21,
II, p. 219, 1970, pp. 428f).

--> - 1.2.1. Descriptional logic and its historical context
This rediscovery occurred after a period of dominance of
nominalism especially among philosophers active in the United States who were taking
advantage of the possibilities created by the new tool of first-order predicate logic (FOL) for
the formulation of philosophical arguments.

Fatefully, Quine and some of his contemporaries succeeded in establishing a widespread
presumption according to which the use of FOL as a tool of philosophy must go hand in
hand with the acceptance of a rather narrow (and nominalist) view as concerns the range of
entities to which constituent terms of FOL are allowed to refer.


I know that you believe that you understood what you think I said, but I am not sure you
realize that what you heard is not what I meant.
Robert McCloskey, State Department spokesman.18

--> awesome quote 

Indeed we have argued ad nauseam against the
drawing of ontological conclusions from the mere surface syntactic features of language.
Smith (2005) describes how we see many of the most influential figures of 20th-century
analytic philosophy, from Wittgenstein and Carnap to Lewis and Armstrong, as having been 
affected by the erroneous (indeed absurd) assumption that it is possible to infer the
ontological structure of reality from the logico-syntactic structure of one specific language.

We have alluded already to our agreement with Merrill in the view that no theory of science
(or, a fortiori of metaphysics) of the sort produced by philosophers could be necessary to
realizing the tasks of science itself

These formulations (taken from the version of NCIT current in June 2010) are not only
logically nonsensical (they are comparable to, for example, ‘Swimming is healthy and has
two vowels’); they are also practically useless for anyone who might want to understand
how, precisely, the respective terms are intended to be used by the authors of the NCIT.

 But Carnap’s method nonetheless failed, not least because of what Carnap’s
fellow nominalist Goodman called the ‘disastrous’ problem of ‘imperfect community’

Ad [3]: This is an egregious error, since Description Logics – in the plural – have nothing
whatever to do with term logic but are rather a (family of fragments of) FOL which have the
very same FOL semantics (modulo constrained expressivity) and in which predicates –
including the relational predicates absent from term logics – play the very same (Merrillapproved) role.

5.3. Ostrich nominalism
Consider the sentence:
Teco is a bonobo,
and let us assume that this sentence is true. We can then ask what it is in reality that makes it
true (and thus what sorts of things scientists would have to attend to, in reality, in order to
verify that it is true). 

From Quine’s point of view, ‘A subject-predicate sentence is true if and only if the subject
satisfies the predicate’. Thus, for example, ‘Snow is white’ is true if and only if snow is
white. Many have been disconcerted by the apparent circularity of this doctrine.

For Armstrong, questions like ‘what makes it true that Teco is a bonobo?’, or more
generally, ‘what is it for a to be an instance of the type T?’, or ‘for a to have the attribute F?’
are compulsory questions – questions that all upstanding philosophers are called upon to
address (Armstrong, 1980). 
The ostrich nominalist’s response to such questions, however, is to bury his head in the sand – while everyone else in the debate (even the most extreme of nominalists who might appeal, for example, to brute relations of resemblance) thinks that a’s
being F warrants some form of analysis.

 In fact, however, we think that the only reason for treating predication in this way
as brute (which is to say: not further analyzable) comes, again, from an overblown
fascination with austere ontology (with a taste, as they say, for desert landscapes). Such an
ontology is revisionary; and it is adopted by the ostrich nominalist without good reason (and
certainly without any reason being supplied).

We recall that the principle of instantiation is formulated only for the case of reference
ontologies (and thus of ontologies created in support of settled science).

Of the four leading upper-level ontologies in the public domain – BFO, DOLCE, SUMO
and OpenCyc – BFO is in one respect more closely tailored to the needs of scientist users.
This is because it is a strict upper ontology, which means that it does not contain its own
representations of physical, chemical, biological, psychological, social or other types of
entities which would properly fall within the domains of the special sciences

DOLCE and BFO in fact grew out of a
common philosophical orientation, and thus BFO overlaps with parts of DOLCE’s top level
and is in close conformity with the DOLCE-associated OntoClean methodology (Guarino
and Welty, 2002).

Ontological traffic law principle: Ontological standards, including a common upperlevel ontology and standards governing syntactical uniformity, are indispensable to
every successful large-scale ontology development initiative, and this is so even if they
are selected arbitrarily provided they enjoy widespread assent among those working in
the relevant research community.

--> That does not happen on Wikidata ,though. Perhaps in subdomains. 

At one point Merrill (2010, p. 105) asserts that our approach ‘is neither science nor
philosophy’, and in this he hits the nail exactly on the head. For in propagating the realist
methodology we are indeed engaging in a novel interdisciplinary activity that involves
elements of both of these, and also of computer science, politics, community organizing,
sociology, logic, and other black arts. 

--> Nice
# Comments



## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28239464)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28239464)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q28239464&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3233/AO-2010-0079)  
