
Big data: Wikiomics
===================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28292893]  
  
Publication date : 04 of September, 2008  

# Highlights
Pioneering biologists are trying to use wiki-type web pages to manage and interpret data, reports
Mitch Waldrop. But will the wider research community go along with the experiment?


Alexander Pico remembers just when the idea
hit him. In January
2007, he and his boss,
Bruce Conklin, were discussing how to push
their software tool for visualizing intracellular
signalling pathways to the next level of interactivity — when Pico blurted out, “What we
really need is a wiki!

--> Cool

The flood is going to rise even faster, says
Amos Bairoch, executive director of the Swiss
Institute for Bioinformatics in Geneva

--> Cool, Amos is awesome.

 Scientists write review articles
and textbooks to make sense of it all. But it’s
still not enough.
Hence the proliferation of wikis, which have
the potential to vastly multiply the number of
annotators and bring in the most interested
expertise

“The best people to do annotation
are the researchers in the laboratories, the people who are producing this knowledge in the
first place,” says bioinformatician Barend Mons at the University of Rotterdam in the Netherlands.
 Mons is one of the prime movers behind WikiProfessional Life Sciences, a site that links
publications on a given topic and enables users
to add their own annotations.

--> Mons too

. As
the developers of WikiPathways and several
others have found, a truly cooperative webbased community requires a change in thinking — a shift in the way scientists work and in
the way they get credit for that work.

Wiki Professional Life Sciences
www.wikiprofessional.org
An attempt to create a ‘Concept Web’ by linking publications on a
given ‘concept’ and enabling user annotation

--> The beginnings of 1.3.3. Wikidata as a platform for representation of biological knowledge

As EcoliWiki creator James Hu of
Texas A&M University in College Station
puts it, “We didn’t want to ask young scientists
who were already editing Wikipedia to learn
a new interface.”

 Andrew Su at the Genomics Institute of
the Novartis Research Foundation in La Jolla,
California, launched a software ‘robot’ that
systematically goes through Wikipedia creating or amending entries for every human gene
that has been studied to any significant degree
— some 9,000 in all. The result is Gene Wiki:
a collection of Wikipedia pages in a standard
format, populated with an integrated suite of
information culled from the National Center for Biotechnology Information’s Entrez Gene.

The science wikis face a tougher challenge in
building critical mass, if only because they’re
aiming at a much smaller audience

--> That is why "in-wiki" approaches are so powerful.

Perhaps the most thoroughly worked out
demonstration of how credit assignment could
function in a wiki context is WikiGenes (not
to be confused with Gene Wiki), created by
Massachusetts Institute of Technology computer scientist Robert Hoffmann (see R. Hoffmann Nature Genet. 40, 1047–1051; 2008).
Like Wikipedia, the WikiGenes site consists
of articles that are collaboratively written
and edited by the users. Unlike Wikipedia,
however, WikiGenes links every piece of text
directly to its author. 

But, says Hu, “cultural
factors are not immutable.
If we can promote various
incremental changes, then
eventually this will take off.”

And that is why it is all very much still an
experiment. “Community intelligence is a new
concept for biology — and in broader society
— and we certainly don’t claim to have the final
answer,” says Su. Still, the more mechanisms for
harnessing community intelligence, the better:
“The community will essentially vote on which
model will be the most useful, and the beauty
is that they will vote with their participation,”
he says. “The only question is which model will
resonate best.”


# Comments

## Tags
1.3.3. Wikidata as a platform for representation of biological knowledge


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28292893)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28292893)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28292893/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q28292893&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28292893/P921%3BP4510)  
