
Molecular taxonomy of major neuronal classes in the adult mouse forebrain
=========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28288068]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2006  

# Highlights

Identifying the neuronal cell types that comprise the mammalian forebrain is a central unsolved problem in neuroscience. Global
gene expression profiles offer a potentially unbiased way to assess functional relationships between neurons. Here, we carried
out microarray analysis of 12 populations of neurons in the adult mouse forebrain. Five of these populations were chosen from
cingulate cortex and included several subtypes of GABAergic interneurons and pyramidal neurons. The remaining seven were
derived from the somatosensory cortex, hippocampus, amygdala and thalamus.

he taxonomic tree indicated highly heterogeneous gene expression even
within a single region. This dataset should be useful for the classification of unknown neuronal subtypes, the investigation of
specifically expressed genes and the genetic manipulation of specific neuronal circuit elements.

A major impediment to answering such questions has been the
difficulty of objectively defining cell types. Cell types have traditionally
been defined on the basis of a wide variety of characteristics including
anatomical location, intrinsic firing properties, synaptic physiology,
somatodendritic and axonal morphology, and the presence or absence
of particular marker genes, such as those encoding neuropeptides
and calcium binding proteins2,3. However, these efforts have not
been able to provide a consensus view on the division of neurons
into functional subtypes4

--> 2.4 The concept of "cell type"

We obtained 11 populations of fluorescently labeled neurons from four
transgenic mouse lines in which green or yellow fluorescent protein
(GFP and YFP, respectively) was expressed in distinct subsets of
neurons. These lines were (i) YFPH: YFP expressed under control of
the Thy1 promoter5, (ii) GIN: GFP under a 2.8 kilobase (kb) Gad1
promoter6, (iii) G42: GFP under a Gad1 bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clone7 and (iv) G30: GFP under a 5.5 kb Gad2 promoter8.
A 12th population was labeled in cingulate cortex by the injection of a
retrograde tracer into the medial dorsal nucleus of the thalamus. We
refer to each population using an abbreviated mouse strain name (or
the prefix CT6 for the retrogradely labeled corticothalamic neurons in
layer 6) followed by the brain region from which the population was
taken (Fig. 1 and Table 1).

--> 2.4.2.2.1. Transgenic animals and marker-based identification

For clarity and consistency, all genes
will hereafter be referred to by their NCBI gene symbol

--> Nice, Ken!


Table 1 Descriptions of the 12 neuronal populations

--> Very cool, good fit for Wikidata (3.1. Cell-type markers in Wikidata kind of)

We identified specific markers for the profiled neuronal populations(Fig. 2). We identified specific markers for the profiled neuronal populations
(Fig. 2).


--> This is definitely going to Wikidata.

Because cell types were, for the most part, assayed in different lines of
mice, it is possible that differences in genetic background contributed
to the observed differences in gene expression. To test this directly, we
profiled a single anatomically defined cell type (CT6-CG) in four
different transgenic lines (YFPH, n ¼ 3; GIN, n ¼ 1; G42, n ¼ 1; and
G30, n ¼ 1). The average correlation coefficient between these samples
(mean of the pairwise comparisons, 15 pairs) was not significantly
different from the average correlation coefficient between all replicate
samples (mean ± s.d.: 0.979 ± 0.006 versus 0.982 ± 0.005; P ¼ 0.093,
two-tailed t-test). I

--> NICE! Explicitly testing for infra-type x strictu-sensu cell types (2.4.4.2. Names for different classes of types)

This was significantly greater (P ¼ 1.1  10–11) than the
1,019.3 ± 22.9 (34.3%) expected by chance (Fig. 6a) (see Methods).
The degree of enrichment was greatest for the most highly differentially
expressed genes (Fig. 6b). This supports the idea that duplicated genes
contribute to the diversification of cell types

Figure 5 Gene ontology map. (a,b) Maps showing over-represented (red) and under-represented (green)
GO terms with associated P-values. C

--> Very cool map.

To reveal the hierarchical relationships
among neuronal populations, we clustered
samples according to their relative distances
to render a dendrogram (Fig. 6d).

The division between glutamatergic projection neurons and
GABAergic interneurons is well established as one of the fundamental
distinctions in the cerebral cortex. These cell types differ markedly in
their morphology, electrophysiological properties, transmitter phenotype and embryological origin. The present study represents the first
comprehensive picture of the widespread differences in gene expression
that underlie this basic division
# Comments

Awesome study.


## Tags
2.4.2. Modern perspectives of classification of cells
2.4 The concept of "cell type"



# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28288068)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28288068)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28288068/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Molecular%20taxonomy%20of%20major%20neuronal%20classes%20in%20the%20adult%20mouse%20forebrain'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
