
Making your database available through Wikipedia: the pros and cons
===================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28254676]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2012  

# Highlights
In this, the 19th Annual Database Issue of Nucleic Acids Research, there are 11 articles that describe the use of a wiki in relation to a biological database.

 We discuss the merits ofusing open wikis, like Wikipedia, versus othermodels, with particular reference to potential van-dalism. Finally, we raise the question about thefuture role of dedicated database biocurators incontext of the thousands of crowdsourced, commu-nity annotations that are now being stored in wikis.


Ward Cunningham, developer of the first wiki software, described it as being ‘the simplest online database that could possibly work’

with the advent of wikis, the curation burden can be distributed to many more people, unrestricted by geographical location, or simply ‘crowdsourced’

Some scientists may assume, incorrectly, that because anyone can edit a wiki at any time, the content must be flawed, especially if they do not know who that user is  

t. Huss et al. (1) elegantly showed the correlated trend between hot topics in the news (as measured by Google searches) and the number of edits in Wikipedia in relation to the GeneWiki project.

who would trust a paper where the authors were anonym- ous? You want to know the provenance of the edit and to know that the user has been vetted in some way to ensure they have the appropriate scientific background. While this undoubtedly helps ensure the validity of the content, there is an ‘energy barrier’ to overcome.

The GeneWiki project is completely contained within Wikipedia as a portal, which acts like a homepage to the project—there is no standalone database.

we envisage that the role of biocurators may change. Instead of solely curating entries, they will need to train new users, verify edits and resolve conflicts as they arise.

The challenge is now to get scientists en masse to generate and edit articles.

--> That is still the challenge!
# Comments

## Tags
--> Wikipedia as a tool for biocuration; 1.3.3. Wikidata as a platform for representation of biological knowledge

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28254676)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28254676)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28254676/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q28254676&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/NAR/GKR1195)  
