
Why do it the hard way? The case for an expressive description logic for SNOMED
===============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28292343]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2008  

# Highlights

In this paper we review these problems in general but focus
in particular on three issues: SNOMED’s “context model”
and the notion of “Situations involving specific context,” the
representation of part-whole relations, and the problems of
determining semantic equivalence between findings and
observables.

. Such an integrated
schema would require extending SNOMED’s logical formalism further than proposed by Schulz, to one that includes
negation, disjunction, and “general concept inclusion axioms (GCIs)”; the obvious candidate for such a formalism is
the W3C standard Web Ontology Language (OWL 1.1)

The OWL 1.1a is strictly more expressive than Ontylog, and
tools exist to load Ontylog directly into OWL 1.1b
. For uniformity, therefore, we present both existing SNOMED definitions
and proposed extensions in OWL 1.1 using the Manchester
syntax

Qualifiers such as “risk” or “family history” that, in
SNOMED parlance, “modify the axis” would be in the
modelled situation differently from other qualifiers, as “prefixes,”


Although ontology languages such as Ontylog and OWL
can be used merely to construct hierarchies of classes
manually, the true strength and purpose of such logic-based
languages is that they allow classes to be defined by complex
class expressions built recursively from previously defined
classes and properties using constructors provided by the
ontology language. The benefits of this approach are that (1)
the meanings behind the classes are made explicit, (2) the
actual hierarchy of classes can be computed automatically on
the basis of their definitions in the ontology, and (3) multiple
hierarchies can coexist or be extracted for different use cases.


the right-identity
statement “site o is_part_of ¡ site” expresses the rule that it
is always the case that anything that has a site that is a part
of a whole also has the whole as a site

One of the persistent issues in clinical information systems is
the distinction between observables and findings. Although
there exists no universal consensus on the distinction, the term
“observable” generally refers to an aspect of the patient that
can be quantified or qualified, e.g., “blood pressure,” “skin
color,” “body-mass index,” etc. A “finding,” on the other hand,
usually refers to something which is either present or absent,
possibly with additional qualification, e.g., “diabetes,” “fractures,” etc., or to the state of some observable such as “increased blood pressure” which likewise may be present or
absent.

An OWL ontology consists
simply of a set of axioms about those entities. Logic is
“monotonic,” additional axioms can lead to additional inferences, but they cannot annul previous inferences. (The
inference that a class is inconsistent—“unsatisfiable” —is
simply one more inference, although it generally indicates
an error.)

Schulz3 suggested using a fragment of OWL with attractive
computational properties, EL15 to achieve many of the
reformulations suggested here. EL meets the above
requirements with the exception of full negation and disjunction. However, we argue that these features are needed
to address context and partonomy cleanly. While we recognize that a move to EL would allow important steps
forward, we argue that the absence of negation and disjunction are serious disadvantages.


The exact costs of implementing all the recommendations
expressed in the present paper cannot be determined with
precision because of the irregularities of SNOMED. Where
the structure of SNOMED is sound and regular, it could
be done largely via scripting. Where the structure is
flawed, formal classification by the OWL reasoner of a
scripted transform would make those flaws more obvious,
but manual detection and revision would still be required.
Where the naming is regular, this work can be aided by
lexical techniques.19 However, other results18,20 suggest
that lexical methods are far from reliable as do experiments with inter-rater variability amongst SNOMED coders.

The result of the suggested changes
would be a simpler and clearer representation. Why do it
the hard way? At a minimum, the feasibility of alternative
schemas should be tested.

# Comments

## Tags
1.2.2. Computational ontologies and their methods
1.3. Knowledge Representation in biology



# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28292343)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28292343)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28292343/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Why%20do%20it%20the%20hard%20way%3F%20The%20case%20for%20an%20expressive%20description%20logic%20for%20SNOMED'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
