
Utopia documents: linking scholarly literature with research data
=================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28292614]  

# Highlights
rescue the knowledge being systematically isolated in literature and data silos

Utopia Documents, a novel PDF reader that semantically integrates visualization and data- analysis tools with published research articles. In a successful pilot with editors of the Biochemical Journal (BJ), the system has been used to transform static document features into objects that can be linked, annotated, visualized and analyzed interactively (http://www.biochemj.org/bj/424/3/)

--> Link resolves to home page URL, not the document.

Availability: http://getutopia.com

--> Domain for sale.

Bairoch estimates that it has taken 23 years to manually annotate about half of Swiss-Prot’s 516 081 entries (Bairoch, 2009; Boeckmann et al., 2003).

Hardly surprising, then, that he should opine, ‘It is quite depressive Consortium, 2009), which currently contains ∼11 million entries. to think that we are spending millions in grants for people to perform experiments, produce new knowledge, hide this knowledge in a often badly written text and then spend some more millions trying to second guess what the authors really did and found’ (Bairoch, 2009). 

--> Amos is awesome. 

by Shotton et al. (2009), who targeted an article in PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases for semantic enhancement

Elsevier offered its Grand Challenge of Knowledge Enhancement in the Life Sciences in 2008. The contest aimed to develop tools for semantic annotation of journals and text- based databases

In this article, we describe a new software tool, Utopia Documents, which builds on Utopia, a suite of semantically integrated protein sequence/structure visualization and analysis tools.

Most papers are still read, and stored by researchers in personal archives, as PDF files.

Utopia Documents allows editors and authors to annotate terms with definitions from online resources (Wikipedia, UniProtKB, PDB, etc.), and permits readers to easily find definitions for themselves.
2.2

An annotated term or region in a document may be associated with definitions and/or database records from a variety of sources. Selecting a term invokes the display of all possible definitions, allowing the reader (or editor) to select for themselves the most appropriate version.

The software is poised to make contributions in a number of areas: for publishers, it offers a mechanism for adding value to oft-neglected PDF archives; for scientists whose routine work involves having to attach meaning to raw data from high-throughput biology experiments (database curators, bench biologists, researchers in pharmaceutical companies, etc.), it provides seamless links between facts published in articles

# Comments

Cool idea, did not seem to have much follow up, though. 