
Data curation + process curation=data integration + science
===========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28303099]  

# Highlights

The workflows themselves are composite processes that could be pooled and reused but only if they too can be found and understood. Thus appropriate curation, including semantic mark-up, would enable processes to be found, maintained and consequently used more easily. This broader view on semantic annotation is vital for full data integration that is necessary for the modern scientific analyses in biology

An absence of curated processes leads to:
? Ignorance of availability: scientists simply do not know what is available and hence reinvent.
? Inadequate information to choose or operate: the lack of sufficient and accurate description is a major obstacle to their potential users and thus the community as a whole, leading to reinvention.
? Poor adoption: services are unknown, unused, poorly used or mis-used as a result

Casual users typically access tools and databases using web browser software. Examples include: a bench scientist with a sequence to analyse or a database curator with an entry to annotate.

Expert users, such as bioinformaticians, set up pipelines or workflows for automated, systematic bulk analysis of data

Developers are tool builders developing client software or applications that use one or more services and/or workflows. They are involved in the development of methodologies and algorithms. Their domain knowledge is often low

Providers are the developers and suppliers of the services and workflows and are mostly expert users or tool developers

Automatons, such as software that seek processes to automatically plug-in to applications, for example, to seek an alternative service in a workflow when the prescribed service repeatedly fails.

Processes are, by their nature, dynamic. Services are not deposited and preserved—they are remotely referred to and are volatile, subject to continual change, often changing with little warning. 

As a consequence, the authors are initiating the BioCatalogue (http://biocatalogue.org) project, an offshoot of myExperiment, but incorporating the experiences of the myGrid Registry. bioCatalogue will provide a means by which a bioinformatician, for instance, could upload a web service file such as WSDL and have it annotated and made available via the catalogue

--> The site is still on 12 years later! Nice!

By generating content that can be indexed by third party information providers, such as Google, it should be easy to find. By presenting programmable APIs we aim to make the catalogue easy to mashup and incorporate in third party applications. As
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28303099)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28303099)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28303099/P921%3BP4510)  
