
Cell-type-specific consequences of Reelin deficiency in the mouse neocortex, hippocampus, and amygdala
======================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28595082]  

# Highlights

Marker-based pheno- typing approach to reexamine the cytoarchitectural con- sequences of Reelin deficiency, using high-throughput histology.

Reln is expressed in Cajal-Retzius (CR) cells in the marginal zone early in cortical development.

High-throughput data generation was performed using a semiautomated nonisotopic digoxigenin-based colorimetric ISH platform

Homotypic aggregation of Rorb-positive cells in somatosensory cortex of reeler mice.

Despite the apparent ‘‘splitting’’ of layer 4, the Rorb-positive cells aggregate into clusters reminis- cent of barrels, often with thin tendrils extending through the layer 2/3 cells connecting clusters on either side

--> Would "Rorb-positive cell" be considered a cell type by the authors? (for me it surely is)

The cellular specificity of the markers used here provides a remarkably clear visualization of the reeler lamination defects, with more cell-type-selective markers providing greater cytoarchitectural resolution. For example, Pvrl3 (Figs. 7E,F, 9E,F) labels both layer 2/3 neurons and layer 4 neurons (albeit less strongly).

Neurons in layer 1 of adult wt mice are largely GABAergic, and subsets of these neurons are labeled by A930038C07Rik and the cholinergic receptor Chrna7.

The majority of canonical interneuron markers [e.g.,
Gad1, parvalbumin (Pvalb), somatostatin (Sst)] label scat- tered neurons without significant laminar specificity in mouse neocortex.

prodynorphin (Pdyn), enriched in layer 5 (Fig. 16A,C), and tachykinin 2 (Tac2), enriched in layers 2–4 (Fig. 16E,G). These markers delineate functionally distinct interneuron subtypes, with Pdyn labeling a subset of Sst-positive interneurons and Tac2 highly overlapping with Vip-positive interneurons

Subtle changes were also seen in the expression of the canonical interneuron marker parvalbumin (Pvalb).

Evidence for cell-type-specific dependence on Reelin signaling for proper positioning was found in the postero- dorsal medial amygdala (MEApd; Fig. 23). Both estrogen receptor 2 (Esr2) and calcitonin receptor (Calcr) are locally restricted to MEApd, with overlapping spatial distributions but nonoverlapping cellular distributions (Fig. 24) in P7 wt mice. Although Esr2-positive cells in reeler mice are maintained in a tight nuclear fashion, Calcr expression shows a much more diffuse pattern spread throughout the MEA extending beyond the poster- odorsal region.

--> It is not very clear to _which_ cell type the phenotype is specific. There is not a name, at least.

Our data con- firm this finding and demonstrate that cells that normally populate the space occupied by the ectopic nucleus are displaced around it. As in the cortex, cell-type-specific requirements for Reln were noted in the medial amygdala, where two nonoverlapping cellular markers (Esr2, Calcr) of the MEApd-c showed differential alterations in cell location in reeler mice.

In principle, the current approach of using serial analysis of panels of cell-type-specific markers is highly exten- sible. Identification of highly specific markers in the mouse is facilitated by the availability of cellular-resolution gene expression databases (Lein et al., 2007; Magdaleno et al., 2006; Visel et al., 2004).

Cell-type-specific abnormalities in MEApd cytoarchitecture in reeler amygdala. Pseudocolored overlays of FISH for amygdala region-specific markers on serial coronal sections through the amygdala at the level of the MEApd in P7 wt (A,C) and reeler (B,D) mice. Labeling is shown for MEA (Adcyap1, yellow), BLA (Grp, teal), and two selective markers for MEApd (Esr2 in green and Calcr in red)

--> Maybe the "cell type" for them is just "a neuron/cell characterized on the region XXX"


# Comments
Markers are described mostly for brain regions instead of for specific cell types.

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28595082)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28595082)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28595082/P921%3BP4510)  
