
WikiGenomes: an open Web application for community consumption and curation of gene annotation data in Wikidata
===============================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28529449]  
  
Publication date : 08 of March, 2017  

# Highlights

Here, we describe WikiGenomes (wikigenomes.org), a web
application that facilitates the consumption and curation of genomic data by the entire
scientific community. WikiGenomes is based on Wikidata, an openly editable knowledge
graph with the goal of aggregating published knowledge into a free and open database.

--> Site is up and nice

Notably, all Wikidata content is in the public domain,
eliminating the potential for problematic restrictions on
downstream reuse and redistribution

--> That always makes me smile

Here, we describe WikiGenomes (www.wikigenomes.
org), the first domain-specific application built on
Wikidata, tailored to the needs of biomedical researchers.
WikiGenomes is a Web application that is designed and
built to allow the genomic researcher to contribute to
curating the knowledge they are discovering. It facilitates
both the consumption and community curation of genomic
data in Wikidata, extending the reach of the biocuration
effort deeper into the long tail of sequenced genomes.

Figure 1. Wikidata data model and sources schematic of the basic structure of the data model in Wikidata.
--> Very cool figure 1


As a foundation, we loaded key information for each genome about each gene and gene product into Wikidata.
Wikidata is not simply an open database into which data
can be dumped. It is a structured knowledge graph that requires careful consideration and community consensus in
its design. Currently, these entity models in Wikidata are
not comprehensive mirrors of those models in their sources
(e.g. NCBI, UniProt etc...). We have chosen to aggregate
key data from a variety of sources, creating a minimal viable model that can be expanded on by us or others


To allow non-developer biologists to interface with the
genomic data knowledge graph that we developed in
Wikidata, we built WikiGenomes. WikiGenomes currently
supports 120 NCBI Bacterial reference genomes (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/browse/reference/) and
their genes and gene products. We designed WikiGenomes
to allow a user to consume genomic data from any organism in Wikidata in a single web application.


Despite
prokaryotic operons being heavily studied, the actual annotations are rarely included in genomic assemblies and
often reside in online supplementary tables of primary publications. Chlamydia pneumoniae is a pathogen affecting
animals and humans causing lung infections (www.cdc.
gov/pneumonia/atypical/cpneumoniae/index.html). The
operons of the C. pneumoniae strain CWL029 genome
were annotated in a 2011 study (19) but access to this information was only provided in the form of an online supplementary Excel file. To our knowledge, none of those
200 experimentally derived annotations have been
curated in GenBank or in operon-specific databases such
as DOOR (20) or ODB3 (21). Illustrating the ‘small data
to big data’ approach of WikiGenomes, we loaded this
content programmatically via the Wikidata API

--> This so important! Connect the long trail!

The key distinction between the Gene Wiki and other
projects with very similar goals but less success in recruiting contributors (22, 26), was that it was embedded directly in Wikipedia. The Wikipedia context provided the
Gene Wiki with immediate discoverability (e.g. Gene Wiki
articles rank highly in Google search results), connection
to a large community of editors, and a proven social and
technical framework for supporting large-scale community
content creation. Wikidata now offers most of these same
characteristics for structured information. Its content is
highly discoverable, with hyperlinks coming in from nearly
every Wikipedia article and a high performance query engine that provides a single point of entry into all of its data.

--> Yes yes yes 

Eventually we would
make WikiGenomes a deployable toolkit that smaller research communities can customize and deploy while easily
sharing their work with the global community.


# Comments
- 1.3.3. Wikidata as a platform for representation of biological knowledge
- 3.1.3. WikidataMarkers: a website and an R packase for cell type gene sets

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28529449)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28529449)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28529449/P921%3BP4510)  
