
ContentMine/Hypothes.is Proposal
================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28650425]  
  
Publication date : 10 of March, 2016  

# Highlights

Everyone's talking about Zika. Should we go to Brazil? Put off having babies? What are the actual facts? Many people - not just "academics" and "medics" - want to fact-check what they hear on the news by reading the scientific literature and form their own opinions. But how should they start?

Search for 'Zika' and ≥tpapers downloads all the papers automatically. You don't just get the papers, but also a novel, faceted view of what’s in them and other topics people are talking about.

Sixty-five years ago Joseph Licklider foresaw “Man-Computer Symbiosis” where “"[humans] will set the goals, formulate the hypotheses, determine the criteria, and perform the evaluations. Computing machines will do the routinizable work that must be done to prepare the way for insights and decisions ..."(Licklider 1960). or “Intelligence Amplification”. ContentMine and Hypothes.is are proposing to join forces to produce a scholarly assistant or amanuens.is as a first step, where human brains are amplified by structured, semantic, filtered knowledge. The rapid recent increase in open, semantic bioscience articles means amanuens.is is a completely new approach to scientific discovery. It overtakes science engines (Google, Microsoft) because the semantics are now science-based, and because iterative annotation tools filter and prune in real-time.

--> Nice way to put it

ContentMine are building an open source pipeline to extract facts from scientific documents that will make the literature review process cheaper, more rigorous, continuous and transparent. We access papers through APIs and web-scraping, normalise the documents and then extract facts such as species names, diseases, DNA sequences, chemicals and sets of keywords through a combination of pattern matching and dictionaries.

We think that EuropePMC is an excellent underdiscovered biomedical knowledge resource and if ContentMine/Hypothes.is are successful in the first round we would:

    robustify the ContentMine pipeline and extract facts from Europe PubMedCentral’s Open Access (OA) subset to be output in a form ingestible by Hypothes.is.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28650425)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28650425)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28650425/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q28650425&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3897/RIO.2.E8424)  
