
An overview of the BIOASQ large-scale biomedical semantic indexing and question answering competition
=====================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28646342]  
  
Publication date : 30 of April, 2015  

# Highlights

BIOASQassesses the ability of systems to semantically index very large numbers of biomedical scientific articles, and to returnconcise and user-understandable answers to given natural language questions by combining information frombiomedical articles and ontologies.


The 2013 BIOASQ competition comprised two tasks, Task 1a and Task 1b. In Task 1a participants were askedto automatically annotate new PUBMEDdocuments with MESH headings. Twelve teams participated in Task 1a, with atotal of 46 system runs submitted, and one of the teams performing consistently better than the MTI indexer used byNLM to suggest MESH headings to curators.

Semantic indexing, i.e., annotating documents withconcepts from established semantic taxonomies or, moregenerally, ontologies, provides a means to combine multi-ple sources and facilitates matching questions to answers.In recent years, many methods have been developed thatutilize existing ontology structures and concepts to indexdocuments and perform semantic search [5]

Theretrieved information is then turned into a concise, user-understandable form, which may be, for example, a rankedlist of candidate answers (e.g., in factoid questions, like“What are the physiological manifestations of disorder Y?”)

Related NLP and QA evaluationsSince the late 1990s, QA research has benefited signif-icantly from competitions organised in the context oflarge conferences, such as the Text Retrieval Confer-ence (TREC) [7]. T


Semantic search challenge:Finding answers to keywordqueries in Linked Data (in the form of RDF triples). Thedata originate from the 2009 Billion Triple Challenge.(Ran in 2011.)

Task 1a, titled“Large scale online biomedical semanticindexing”, deals with large scale classification of biomedi-cal documents into ontology concepts. The purpose is toinvestigate the performance of the state of the art meth-ods and the new methodologies proposed by participantscompared to the manual annotation that is widely used inpublic databases.

Yes/NoExact + IdealIs miR-21 related tocarcinogenesis?YesYes. It has been demonstratedin several experimentalstudies that miR-21 hasoncogenic potential, and issignificantly disregulated innumerous types of cancer.Therefore, miR-21 is closelyrelated to carcinogenesis.

Summary
IdealWhat is the mechanism ofaction of abiraterone?-Abiraterone acts by inhibitingcytochrome P450 17 ̆03b1-hydroxylase (CYP17A1), a criticalstep in androgen biosynthesis, thusleading to inhibition of androgenbiosynthesis.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28646342)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28646342)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28646342/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q28646342&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/S12859-015-0564-6)  
