
CellFinder: a cell data repository
==================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28660708]  

# Highlights

CellFinder (http://www.cellfinder.org) is a compre- hensive one-stop resource for molecular data characterizing mammalian cells in different tissues and in different development stages

To date, CellFinder describes 3394 cell types and 50951 cell lines. The database currently contains 3055 microscopic and anatomical images, 205 whole-genome expression profiles of 194 cell/ tissue types from RNA-seq and microarrays and 553905 protein expressions for 535 cells/tissues.

Its ontological backbone currently consists of 204741 ontology terms incorporated from 10 differ- ent ontologies unified under the novel CELDA ontology.

there is no resource available that provides a comprehensive set of measured data for different cells and cell types. This deficit is not only restricting cell biologists and medical researchers in their effort to investigate cells, but also increasingly limits scientific progress in practical applications such as the com- parison between in vitro stem cell-derived cells and their supposed in vivo counterparts for regenerative medicine and in cell-based disease modeling (6).

the potential of the growing body of biomed- ical knowledge and data to compare, understand, analyze, predict and synthesize cell function is rapidly increasing, especially through the recent advancements on cell-based therapies (22,23). To facilitate the exploitation of these data, CellFinder (http://www.cellfinder.org) was estab- lished to provide a one-stop portal for accessing curated information from the organ to the cell level.

the set of cell types, defined as phenotypically distinct cells, is still incomplete in these databases, and new cell types are continuously defined due to improved characterization methods. Therefore, we use expert knowledge to select and integrate missing tissue and developmental stage-specific cell types from literature and existing databases such as the Characterization Tool (41), hESCreg (41) and the Cellosaurus (ftp://ftp.nextprot.org/pub/current_release/ controlled_vocabularies/cellosaurus.txt).

--> I think they meant cell line here.

the high-quality data sets, which were incorporated into CellFinder were selected by an expert committee of biologists and bioinformatician.

CellFinder also incorporates expression information derived from publications. Information extraction is carried out by a text mining pipeline followed by human expert validation.

Data in CellFinder are also linked to anatomical images from Wikimedia (http://commons. wikimedia.org). CellFinder contains in total 3055 images of 1790 cells, tissues and organs. High-resolution micros- copy images are available for 85 distinct cells and tissues.

--> Nice! Interesting to see that Wikimedia integration is at least a 7 year old practice for cell types.

In a second analysis of data from the HPA (15), 46 human cell types were systematically compared with each other (e.g. breast glandular cells or lung macrophages). Results of each comparison consist of a list of differentially expressed proteins.

Text-based search application. The text-based search application was used to identify genes that are expressed in podocytes and compared in their expression with other tissues. (A) By searching for podocytes, a glomerular visceral epithelial cell of the kidney, a list of results is provided together with pictograms that identify the types of information available for each term.

The platform is constantly expanded with further pre- analyzed data and tools for analyzing its content in a con- venient manner, for instance to identify genes or protein
markers that are expressed in a precise cell type and not in proximally or developmentally related ones. The need for a fully comprehensive cell type catalog and definition of classification standards is emphasized by different numbers of human cell types provided by CellFinder (1058) versus the 2260 suggested by CELLPEDIA by a combination of conventional taxonomy with physical mappings (4). To the best of our knowledge, our compre- hensive and integrated view on cells is a novel and import- ant contribution to the biomedical sciences.


# Comments

Last database update in 2015.

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28660708)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28660708)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28660708/P921%3BP4510)  
