
Entity linking for biomedical literature
========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28642941]  

# Highlights

we propose a novel unsupervised collective inference approach to link entities from unstructured full texts of biomedical literature to 300 ontologies. The approach leverages the rich semantic information and structures in ontologies for similarity computation and entity ranking

A major bottleneck in understanding scientific litera-
ture lies in the enormous amount of unexplained abbre- viations and terminologies

The first challenge lies in the lack of sufficient context
for understanding the entity mentions. This requires us to move from non-collective approaches which link each individual mention at a time to collective inference by leveraging the global topical coherence and linking a set of relevant mentions simultaneously.

Finally,previouswork mainly focused on discovering knowledge from source texts, while limited efforts have been made on exploiting the rich structures of other knowledge bases beyond Wikipedia. DBpedia Spotlight [25] is the only system that leverages Semantic Web data to link entities to DBpedia, a generic dataset derived from Wikipedia.

We provide thorough analysis about the effective- ness of our approach and the remaining challenges, and shed a light on the general research direction of automatic “reading” scientific literature via knowl- edge enrichment.

We utilize a very broad definition of a Knowledge Base (KB).A Knowledge Base is a dataset that contains some, potentially limited, structured content along with unstructured content. Using this broad definition, Wikipedia is a popular knowledge base that is often used for entity linking because it contains structured information such as titles, hyperlinks, infoboxes as well as unstructured texts. How- ever, in order to take advantage of richer structures and domain knowledge which are not offered by Wikipedia, we constructed a knowledge base from 300 biology- related ontologies from BioPortal [6].


First a name tagger [28] is used to extract entity mentions.

Then, a shallow parser [29] is used to add noun phrase chunks to the list of mentions

By a thorough pilot study, we have demonstrated that it’s possible to skip the tedious manual annotation by incorporating rich structures in ontologies in an unsupervised collective inference framework. The proposed approach would save scientists concerned with staying informed about research development an enormous amount of time.

--> Well, but 83% linking accuracy is not really great, is it?
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28642941)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28642941)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28642941/P921%3BP4510)  
