
A Survey of Bioinformatics Database and Software Usage through Mining the Literature
====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28600864]  

# Highlights

s. Here we use text mining to process the PubMed Central full-text corpus, identifying mentions of databases or software within the scientific literature

--> With deep annotation, this would be much simpler.

Finally, our work is a step towards automated extraction of scientific method from text. We make the dataset generated by our study avail- able under the CC0 license here: http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.1281371.

--> Noice!! This is _definitely_ going to Wikidata. At least in part.

We use bioNerDS [9] to automatically extract database and software name mentions from
the entire open-access set ofPubMed Central full-text documents.

The relative usage (or popularity) of a given resource can have an impact on best-practice, as if a resource is well used within a community, it must be consid- ered at least sufficient for its intended purpose (i.e., community-practice).

bioNerDS is a dictionary and rule-based resource recognition system, which uses a series of textual clues to recognise both old and new database and software names within the full-text literature.

A new resource list based on the ontology listings at the NCBO BioPortal [19], which con- tains 358 ontology names, has been added.

We have applied bioNerDS to 713,634 full-text articles taken from the PubMed Central open- access corpus, as downloaded in December 2013.

bioNerDS extracted a total of 5,411,968 resource mentions from the full PubMed Central bio-
medical literature corpus (713,634 full-text articles).


We have also made no distinction between the different types ofresource found within the
literature. These resources could reasonably be split into four distinct groups: 
1. Databases—these form the primary data repositories within bioinformatics 
2. Software—these are the primary sources ofdata analysis and manipulation
3. Packages—these are generally much smaller programs each with a specific purpose, often extending existing software or packages
4. Ontologies—these are the primary data annotation mechanisms

That over 70% ofresource names are only mentioned once implies much wasted effort on
behalfofthose developing bioinformatics databases and software. A developer or institution’s ability to maintain and support a resource can be, however, influenced by a number of factors, not least ofwhich is funding, but also includes the software and data management practises of the community [30]

Even if a resource “dies”, the insights gained from any resource development will generally persist, even if the resource itself does not—the additional knowledge gained through increased competition is likely to be a good thing; the long-tail is likely to be where more innovation in software takes place [29].



# Comments
--> Wow, R has a HUGE community usage.

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28600864)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28600864)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28600864/P921%3BP4510)  
