
KnowLife: a versatile approach for constructing a large knowledge graph for biomedical sciences
===============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28646868]  
  
Publication date : 14 of May, 2015  

# Highlights

hird, mostprior work on IE has focused on the molecular level or chemogenomics only, like protein-protein interactions orgene-drug relationships, or solely address highly specific topics such as drug effects

We address these three limitations by a versatile and scalable approach to automatic KB construction. Usinga small number of seed facts for distant supervision of pattern-based extraction, we harvest a huge number of facts inan automated manner without requiring any explicit training

KnowLife is a large knowledge base for health and life sciences, automatically constructed fromdifferent Web sources. As a unique feature, KnowLife is harvested from different text genres such as scientificpublications, health portals, and online communities. Thus, it has the potential to serve as one-stop portal for a widerange of relations and use cases. To showcase the breadth and usefulness, we make the KnowLife KB accessiblethrough the health portal (http://knowlife.mpi-inf.mpg.de).

Beyond manual curation.Biomedical knowledge isadvancing at rates far greater than any single human canabsorb.
Therefore, relying on manual curation of KB’s isbound to be a bottleneck. To fully leverage all publishedknowledge, automated information extraction (IE) frominput texts is mandatory.

 The UMLS dictionaryenables KnowLife to detect entities in text, going beyondgenes and proteins and covering entities about anatomy,physiology, and therapy.

KnowLife currently supports 13 binary rela-tions between entities, each with a type signature con-straining its domain and range (i.e., its left and right argu-ment types).
We first discuss the results obtained from the differenttext genres: i) scientific (PubMed publications), ii) ency-clopedic (Web portals like Mayo Clinic or Wikipedia), iii)social (discussion forums). Table 4 gives, column-wise, thenumber of facts and precision figures for four differentcombinations of genres


e conclude thatthe full pipeline is a well-designed architecture whosestrong performance cannot be easily achieved by a simplerapproach.Error analysisWe analyzed the causes of error for all 760 facts annotatedas incorrect from the experimental setting using the fullinformation extraction pipeline and all three text genres.This setting allows us to compare the utility of the differ-ent components as well as the different genres. As seen inTable 7, we categorize the errors as follows

Preprocessing

Entity Recognition

Entity Disambiguation
medsfor medicines wasdisambiguated as the entityMicrocephaly, Epilepsy, andDiabetes Syndrome.

Coreferencing

Factually Wrong:Although our methods successfullyharvested a fact, the underlying text evidence made awrong statemen
--> That is the trickiest

Table 8 Top-20 pairs of inter-connected biomedical areaswithin KnowLife

In the future, we plan to improve the entity recogni-tion to accommodate a wider variety of entities beyondthose in UMLS. For instance, colloquial usage (medsformedicines) and composite entities (amputation of rightleg) 


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28646868)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28646868)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28646868/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q28646868&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/S12859-015-0549-5)  
