
NeuroLex.org: an online framework for neuroscience knowledge
============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28681367]  

# Highlights

Investigators still primarily seek answers to their questions in an increasingly densely populated collection of articles in the literature, each of which must be digested individually. 
If it were easier to search a knowledge base that was structured to answer neuroscience questions, such a system would enable questions to be answered in seconds that would otherwise require hours of literature review. 
In this article, we describe NeuroLex.org, a wiki-based website and knowledge management system.

Producing structured knowledge for the purposes of organizing, indexing and searching information has a long history in the biosciences.

Why work with ontologies instead ofrelying on databases? 
While databases are extremely powerful means of capturing and organizing data, one of the challenges of their usage for open-ended discovery is that the relationships between data types may change rapidly as new information becomes available. 
Due to the fact that database columns are separate data objects from rows, there is no explicit, strongly-typed relationship between data entities as there are in schemes such as the Resource Description Framework (RDF).

In short, curation and knowledge engineering in the biosciences is still very manual, highly technical, and therefore costly. 
A third challenge is that the tools used to create and maintain biomedical ontologies require a lot of specialized knowledge and have not been inherently collaborative, though some are moving that direction.

 third challenge is that the tools used to create and maintainbiomedical ontologies require a lot of specialized knowledge andhave not been inherently collaborative, though some are movingthat direction. The most popular and functional ontology editors,such as Protégé (Rubin et al., 2007)orOBO-edit(Day-Richteret al., 2007), were originally designed for single user interaction.

 --> Wikidata, on the other hand, has been designed from scratch to be collaborative

 
In this article, we describe NeuroLex.org, a semantic wiki-based website and knowledge management system, the goal of which is to bring the complex frontier of knowledge within neurobiology into a framework that allows neuroscientists to review the anatomical features and principal concepts of neuroscience, link these features and concepts to resources, aggregate their personal understanding with that other scientists, and expose features and concepts that are still controversial or missing. To

NeuroLex is built using the Semantic MediaWiki platformv1.15.1 (Krotzsch et al., 2006).

To enable users tomake modifications to knowledge that has been structured within NeuroLex.org, we implemented a form-based edit system as opposed to the standard free text and markup system used by many wiki sites, including Wikipedia.

--> Nice, a pre-Wikidata, Wikidata-like system


Change history is available both at the level of individual pages (http://j.mp/zC8Aci) or at the level of the entire site (http://neurolex.org/wiki/Special:RecentChanges).

NeuroLex.org searches from Google have a “long tail” (Anderson, 2004) quality to them where the value of the content is the comprehensive catalog of items that are held rather than the popularity of a few major terms, a feature that has been observed in other biological wiki efforts.

“What are all the brain regions that send projections into the cerebellum or any of its parts via mossy fibers?” 
As detailed in the methods section, this query could not be handled by the innate query functionality of the current wiki, but required importing the NeuroLex knowledge graph to a triple store that supported SPARQL 1.1.

--> Also built-in on Wikibases

To address this question, we included statements derived from a textbook on cerebellar anatomy (Altman and Bayer, 1997) in order to give the system a means of understanding (1) the parts of the cerebellum, (2) what it means to send projections, and (3) what mossy fibers are.

The production of a well structured and comprehensive “parts list” or knowledge base that is machine processable would be a key asset to the field of neuroscience as it would drive hypothesis generation across subdisciplines.

If biological scientists cannot easily get knowledge out of an information system, they cannot benefit from it.
If biological scientists cannot easily put knowledge into an information system, the system will be uninteresting for lack of content. 
At the same time, if ontological experts cannot structure queries and reason over domain knowledge, an information system will not be able to return interesting results or reveal non-obvious knowledge connections and will also suffer from disuse. With

Although no wiki is entirely intuitive, we have seen from the usage of individuals we have worked with that the learning curve is significantly lower than current ontology editing tools and most customized database entry systems.
Of equal importance, we have seen users with a minimal knowledge of ontology languages or programming skills report that the wiki platform allows them to create custom knowledge reports, something that typically requires an ontology expert or database programmer.


the NeuroLex wiki-based approach is to allow anyone to edit, and to deal with consistency after edits have occurred with a “Recent changes” list that makes it transparent exactly what edits have occurred when and by whom (see the link in (J) on Figure 2).

Put another way, the OBO Foundry ontologies have been requested to be edited on average 1.5 times a day while the NeuroLex ontology has been edited on average 258 times a day. 
While more edits does not immediately suggest a higher quality of content, a difference of two orders ofmagnitude suggests a difference in the scalability of the contribution model.

Understanding the importance of well-defined relationships is crucial to the mission of creating computer frameworks to grapple with the complexity of biological systems.
Indeed, these relationships are the glue that hold the knowledge base together—they are the edges that connect the vertices of the complex web of interactions that must exist between the biological entities playing out their roles within biological systems. 

The challenge of defining the set of relationships that this neuron should have to other entities—essentially what are the properties of a neuron? 
Despite more than 100 years of investigation, this is a challenge that is mostly unrecognized by the neuroscience community, and for which no consensus has yet been established by those in the biomedical ontology community.

The use of Semantic Forms by NeuroLex eliminates the need for the user to learn wiki-text syntax, as Wikipedia editors must.

FIGURE 1 | Landing page for NeuroLex.org.Several features arehighlighted (G)Quick creation forms for cells, brain regions, resources,and generic page contents.

FIGURE 3 | The edit form for the Cerebellum granule cell page.The form isinvoked by clicking the Edit button, shown in the enlargement in the upperright. Text boxes enable the user to make edits to the fields of information onthe page. Fields whose values link to other category pages have anautocomplete feature, which may be further refined through defining a domainrestriction. In the example shown here, the “Neurotransmitter receptors” fieldselects from subclasses of “Molecule” (solid arrowhead). The save button atthe bottom of the page makes the edits immediately visible in NeuroLex

--> Form-based approach, super cool

Table 2 | Nervous system cells in the NeuroLex.

Lastly, the approach of the GeneWiki (Good et al., 2011) has been to leverage Wikipedia itself. 
While we explored this option, we felt that the flexibility of building on our own servers and being able to make modifications to the platform without special permission from the Wikimedia foundation enabled us to prototype functionality much more rapidly than would have been possible on that platform.

--> That is a good point. In the context of Wikidata, the WBstack is an interesting alternative.



Wikipedia’s approach to exposing structured knowledge has beenthrough info-boxes that are implemented via MediaWiki tem-plates. The DBPedia project (Hahn et al., 2010) has mined theseinfo-boxes to package the knowledge within them into RDF. WithNeuroLex, we have circumvented the need for this two step pro-cess, first to an info-box, and second to RDF, by building on topof Semantic MediaWiki. 


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28681367)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28681367)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28681367/P921%3BP4510)  
