
Nanopublications for exposing experimental data in the life-sciences: a Huntington's Disease case study
=======================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28606409]  

# Highlights
Data fromhigh throughput experiments often produce far more results than can ever appear in the main text or tables of a single research article. In these cases, the majority of new associations are often archived either as supplemental information in an arbitrary format or in publisher-independent databases that can be difficult to find. These data are not only lost from scientific discourse, but are also elusive to automated search, retrieval and processing. Here, we use the nanopublication model to make scientific assertions that were concluded from a workflow analysis of Huntington’s Disease data machine-readable, interoperable, and citable.

Nanopublications can have a leading role into hypotheses generation offering opportunities to produce large-scale data integration.

there is no well-defined standard for scien- tists to get credit for the curation effort that is typically required to make a discovery and its supporting exper- imental data available in an online database.

The assertion graph contains the central statement that the author considers valuable (publishable) and for which she would like to be cited (attribution).

--> Nice used of she.

In our experiment we investigated the relation between gene deregulation in Huntington’s disease and epigenetic features that might be associated with transcriptional abnormalities (E. Mina et al., manuscript in preparation). We show how the results of this case study can be represented as nanopublications and how this promotes data integration and interoperability

Our analysis has been implemented through the use of workflows using the Taverna workflow management sys- tem [12,13]. As input we used gene expression data from three different brain regions fromHD affected individuals and age and sex matched controls [14]. We

in our case study, we found that the association that we inferred between the HTT gene, which mutant form causes Huntington’s Dis- ease, and BAIAP2, a brain-specific angiogenesis inhibitor (BAI1)-binding protein, was present in a table in a paper by Kaltenbach et al. [17]. However, it is not explicitly in any abstract which makes it hard to retrieve from systems such as PubMed

Our nanopublications are stored in the AllegroGraph triple store [18]. The link to the browsable user interface and the SPARQL endpoint can be found on the myExperiment link: http://www.myexperiment.org/packs/622.html.

--> Link working, interesting platform.

For some of the terms in these statements we found sev-
eral ontologies that defined classes for them. For example, “promoter”, “gene”, and “CpG island” appear (among oth-
ers) in the following ontologies: NIF Standard ontology (NIFSTD), NCI Thesaurus (NCI) and the Gene Regu- lation Ontology (GRO)b. We chose to use NIFSTD for our case study, because it covers an appropriate domain and it uses the Basic Formal Ontology (BFO), which can benefit data interoperability and OWL reasoning (e.g. for checking inconsistencies). 

Publishing information is meaningful only if there is enough supporting information for reproducing them. For example Ioannidis et al., pointed out that they could not reproduce the majority of the 18 articles they investigated describing results from microarray experiments, includ- ing selected tables and figures [21].Nanopublication does not guarantee full reproducibility, but as a model for com- bining data with attribution and provenance in a digital format it at least makes it possible to trace the origin of scientific results.

In the Publication Info section of a nanopublication we capture details that are required for citation and usage of the nanopublication itself.

By choosing RDF as exchange format for nanopublica- tions, we also support the data integration features ofRDF.

To demonstrate how data integration with nanopublications can occur in practice we applied simple SPARQL queries to our local nanopublication store. For example, to identify differentially expressed genes for which the promoters are associated both with a CpG island and a poised chromatin state.

In the end, the query ran within 15 seconds and
retrieved the results as given in Table 2. A detailed dis- cussion of the results is out of the scope of this paper. However, we note that the effort required to integrate these data is relatively minimal: aside from loading the data sources, it approximately takes only an hour to con- struct the query. Moreover, as is indicated in Figure 6, the query itself is modular: consisting of specific sections related to specific datasets. Therefore extending the query to include other datasets is not very difficult.


To date there is an enormous amount of valuable infor- mation that has been produced by expensive experiments, but remains lost in databases and other repositories that are not easily accessed or processed automatically.

This paper presents a method that enables life scientists to (i) expose the results from an analysis as scientific assertions, (ii) claim these as their contribution and (iii) provide provenance of the analysis as reference for the claimed assertions. We demonstrated an exam- ple from research in Huntington’s Disease.

Nanop- ublication provides an incentive for scientists to expose the results from individual experiments and make them available for future exploitation. This ultimately facilitates research across datasets that we anticipate will provide new insights about disease mechanisms. Research can become more efficient and go beyond monolithic journal publication [30].

# Comments

Very well written.
The potential of including publication _in_ the data analysis pipeline is just amazing. Objectivity at its apex.


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28606409)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28606409)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28606409/P921%3BP4510)  
