
Towards the collaborative curation of the registry underlying Identifiers.org
=============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28709067]  

# Highlights
We briefly describe the Identifiers.org Registry, the current curation duties entailed, and our plans to extend and distribute this workload through collaborative and community efforts. 


Most data providers identify individual records within their data sets using alphanumeric identifiers. However, this alone is often not enough to uniquely identify the entity under consideration, especially where multiple data sets are considered simultaneously

To build unique URIs, the system combines two pieces of information: a ‘namespace’ and the local identifier.

By generating free, unique, perennial and location independent identifiers, Identifiers.org URIs and the underlying Registry have proven to be highly successful and are now widely used outside the modelling field.

To insure a high level of consistency and quality between all the information it stores, the Registry is a curated resource. This means that a curator (a person tasked with manually managing data from submission through to its public release) will always review the information provided.


Namespace clashes are not possible, as each is assigned only once and never reused (even in the exceptional case where deprecation is required).

If the curation process following a user request (whether
new submission or update) is successful, the affected data collection is released to the live database immediately. 

g. As the primary function of the Registry is to provide stable and resolvable URIs for data records, the accuracy of all possible resolvable locations is checked daily.

This should lead to a very productive synergy between the Registry and the BioSharing initiative (19) (which will host this informa- tion, making use of Identifiers.org URIs for identification purposes), with both efforts providing complementary elements


The adoption of Identifiers.org URIs is growing significantly and rapidly within the scientific community. In particular, these URIs are widely used by researchers tasked with pla- cing existing data sets in the Linked Open Data cloud
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28709067)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28709067)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28709067/P921%3BP4510)  
