
Semantically enabling a genome-wide association study database
==============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28707570]  

# Highlights

: We present a methodology for applying phenotype annotations to a comprehensive genome-wide association dataset and for ensuring compatibility with the Semantic Web.

The database resource GWAS Central [http://www.
gwascentral.org] (established in 2007, then named HGVbaseG2P [3]) is a comprehensive central collection of genetic association data

GWAS Central currently holds 1664 reported phenotypes (Figure 1; blue line). Identical phenotypes may be described differently between studies due to inconsistencies asso- ciated with variations in terminology.

Despite OBO Foundry efforts in promoting the creation of orthogonal ontologies, there is still a high rate of term reuse, with a recent study reporting 96% of Foundry candidate ontologies using terms from other ontologies [15]. The prevalence of term reuse and redundancy between ontologies leaves potential users asking the obvious question “which ontology do I use?”.

The complexity of GWAS data sets and associated metadata led us to adopt so-called “nanopublications” [35]; a recently developed framework for publishing one or more scientific assertions as Linked Data, wrapped into self-contained “bundles” which also contain the contextual information necessary for the interpretation of the assertion, as well as provenance, attribution and other key metadata.

The results from our ontology suitability analysis indicated that HPO would facilitate unique mapping of 30 GWAS phenotype descriptions during the partial mapping process. Manual inspection of these terms showed they were terms describing medical signs and symptoms, rather than disease names that have high coverage in the other ontologies investigated. For example, HPO can uniquely describe “Coronary artery calcification” (term identifier HP:0001717) rather than the disease for which this can be a clinical manifestation such as in “Gaucher Disease” (MeSH Descriptor identifier D005776). 

--> Way batter to do trait-based GWAS than disease-based GWAS, primary sources! I guess there would be benefits for both approaches though (traits in multiple diseases).

We designed and created nanopublications (following the OpenPHACTS guidelines [51] where possible), related resources, and a query tool for RDF-based GWAS data in GWAS Central. To this end, we attempted to reuse ontol- ogies and to link to existing resources. Figure 5 shows a schematic representation of a GWAS nanopublication and its connection to other external, semantically-enabled, resources. The entire nanopublication dataset, created from the primary GWAS Central relational database, has also been loaded into a triple-store. The triple-store can be queried through the GWAS Central SPARQL end-point. To execute a SPARQL query against the triple-store a researcher can either enter a query in the “GWAS Central SPARQL query form” page (accessible from the start page), or viathe APIbysending an HTTP GETorPOST request containing a ‘query’ parameter to the web service [http://fuseki.gwascentral.org/gc/query]

The SPARQL end-point was set up using the Fuseki server [67]

In an alternative approach, the PhenoHM human- mouse phenotype comparison server accepts phenotypes as input, rather than genes, and implements direct map- pings from human (HPO) to mouse (MPO) ontologies [58] to identify human and mouse genes with conserved phenotypes.

It is important to emphasise that GWAS Central
nanopublications are simply items of data, not statements of knowledge. For example, a p-value for a marker in a GWAS represents a statistical test of association that was factually observed in an experiment. This p-value is clearly not equivalent to a validated biological causal rela- tionship between a genetic variant and a disease.


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28707570)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28707570)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28707570/P921%3BP4510)  
