
Semi-automated ontology generation within OBO-Edit
==================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28751720]  
  
Publication date : 15 of June, 2010  

# Highlights

he Open Biomedical Ontology (OBO)Foundry alone lists over 90 ontologies mainly built with OBO-Edit. Creating and maintaining such ontologies is a labour-intensive,difficult, manual process. Automating parts of it is of great importancefor the further development of ontologies and for biocuration

Dresden Ontology Generator forDirected Acyclic Graphs (DOG4DAG), a system which supports thecreation and extension of OBO ontologies by semi-automaticallygenerating terms, definitions and parent–child relations from text inPubMed, the web and PDF repositories.

--> Automatic generation of OBO ontologies 1.3.1. OBO Foundry and biomedical ontologies


 The term generation leads to high-qualityterms also found in manually created ontologies. Up to 78% ofdefinitions are valid and up to 54% of child–ancestor relationscan be retrieved. There is no other validated system that achievescomparable results.


If thegenerated term exists already in other OBO ontologies then acorresponding reference is provided.Endocytosisis e.g. definedin GO and in the ascomycete phenotype ontology APO, whereastraffickingdoes not exist in any OBO ontology. Such referencesto OBO increase the confidence in the quality of the term andthey allow the user to easily re-use terms and synonyms fromother OBO-Ontologies. F


Definition generation: the method aims to generate definitions that will follow the definitional pattern ‘A is a B with property C’, meaning that A is defined through the more general term B and can be distinguished from other Bs by its unique characteristic C.

--> genus-differentia pattern

Taxonomy induction: given definitions of the form ‘A is a B with property C’ we extract existing terms similar to B (again Hamming distance) as candidate parents in a parent–child relationship. 

--> cool

DOG4DAG is the first ontology generation systems that has been thoroughly validated in the life science domain



An important question is whether generated terms satisfy naming guidelines proposed for manually created terms as put forward by Schober et al. (2009). The authors comprehensively evaluated existing open biomedical ontologies and defined a number of guidelines for naming concepts to reach acceptance by the community. 

Winnenburg et al. (2008) conclude that manual curation of literature is necessary for high-quality annotation but can be supported by automated methods. 

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28751720)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28751720)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28751720/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q28751720&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTQ188)  
