
Modularisation of domain ontologies implemented in description logics and related formalisms including OWL
==========================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q29027414]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2003  

This paper proposes initial criteria for a two-step
normalisation of ontologies implemented using OWL or
related DL based formalisms.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
I.2.4 Knowledge Representation Formalisms and
Methods—representation languages. 

--> Cool embedding of categorization

The fundamental goal of implementation normalisation is
to achieve explicitness and modularity in the domain
ontology in order to support re-use, maintainability and
evolution.

 logical subsumption – i.e. to say that
“B is a kind of A” is to say that “All Bs are As” or in
logic notation x. Bx → Ax. Therefore, given a list of
definitions and axioms, a theorem prover or “reasoner”
can infer subsumption and check whether the proposed
ontology is self-consistent (“satisfiable”). 



The list of features supported by various logic based
knowledge representation formalisms varies, but for this
paper we shall assume that it includes at least:
• Primitive concepts described by necessary
conditions
• Defined concepts defined by necessary & sufficient
conditions
• Properties which relate concepts and can themselves
be placed in a subsumption hierarchy.
• Restrictions constructed as quantified role-concept
pairs, e.g. (restriction hasLocation someValuesFrom
Leg) meaning “located in some leg”.
• Axioms which declare concepts either to be disjoint
or to imply other conceptsr

--> This paper is _GOOD_ 

False premises most commonly result from attempts to
work around restrictive formalisms [1]. They are less of a
problem with modern formalisms such as OWL using
classifiers such as FaCT [5] or Racer [4].
However, incomplete or inexplicit, information remains a
problem – most frequently because either a) information
is left implicit in the naming conventions and is therefore
unavailable to the reasoner, or b) information is
represented in ways that do not fully express distinctions
critical to the user. 


The essence of our proposal for normalisation is that the
primitive skeleton of the Domain Ontology should consist
of disjoint homogeneous trees. In more detail:
1. The branches of the primitive skeleton of the domain
taxonomy should form trees, i.e. no domain concept
should have more than one primitive parent.
2. Each branch of the primitive skeleton of the domain
taxonomy should be homogeneous and logical, i.e.
the principle of specialisation should be subsumption
(as opposed, for example to partonomy) and should
be based on the same, or progressively narrower
criteria, throughout. For example, even if it were true
that all vascular structures were part of the circulatory
system, placing the primitive “vascular structure”
under the primitive “circulatory system structure”
would be inhomogeneous because the differentiating
notion in one case is structural and in the other case
functional


. The primitive skeleton should clearly distinguish:
a) “Self-standing” concepts5
: most “things” in the
physical and conceptual world – e.g. “animals”,
“body parts”, “people”, “organisations”, “ideas”,
“processes” etc as well as less tangible notions
such as “style”, “colour”, “risk”, etc. Primitive
self-standing primitives should be disjoint but open, i.e. the list of primitive children should
not be considered exhaustive (should not “cover”
the parent), since lists of the things that exist in
the world never be guaranteed exhaustive. 

) “Partitioning” or “Refining” concepts: value
types and values which partition conceptual
(qualia- [3]) spaces e.g. “small, medium, large”,
“mild, moderate, severe, etc. For refining
concepts: a) there should be a taxonomy of
primitive “value types” which may or may not be
disjoint; b) the primitive children of each value
type should form a disjoint exhaustive partition,
i.e. the values should “cover” the “value type”.


Minimising implicit differentia
This approach seeks to minimise implicit information.
Not everything can be defined in a formal system; some
things must be primitive.
In effect, for each primitive, there is a set of implicit
notions that differentiate it from each of its primitive
parents (the Aristotelian “differentia” if you will). Since
these notions are implicit, they are invisible to human
developer and mechanical reasoner alike. They are
therefore likely to cause confusion to developers and
missed or unintended inferences in the reasoner. The
essence of the requirement for independent homogeneous
taxonomies of primitives is that there be exactly one
implicit differentiating notion per primitive concept, thus
confining implicit information to its irreducible minimum.
All other differentiating notions must be explicit and
expressed as “restrictions” on the relations between
concepts. 

--> That was one of the goals of - 2.4.4. A pragmatic definition of cell type

Figure 1: Normalisation of Ontology of Biological Substances and Roles. 

--> Nice figure

New definitions for new concepts can only add new
inferences; they cannot remove or invalidate existing
inferences. Likewise, adding new primitive concepts in
an open disjoint tree can only add information. They
may make new definitions and inferences possible, but
they cannot invalidate old inferences (i.e. cause the
ontology to become unsatisfiable).


Figure 2b: Untangled skeleton for example ontology 2a plus definitions linking independent branches 

--> That is beautiful

Flavours of is-kind-of
The criteria of normalisation presented here can also be
seen as a means to satisfying a common request from
knowledge engineers – to be able to have different
“flavours” of is-kind-of. In effect, we allow exactly one
unlabelled flavour of is-kind-of link corresponding to the
links declared in the primitive skeleton. All others are
inferred by the reasoner. In simple cases where they
follow from existential restrictions, the restrictions can be
thought of as ‘labelling’ the inferred is-kind-of links. 


For
example, consider ‘colour’. On the one hand, ‘colours’
could be considered as partitioning a “qualia space”, and
the notion of an “identity condition” for colours is
problematic. However, in practice, the list of named
colours is indefinitely large and constantly growing –
witness the efforts of paint companies and interior
decorators.

The notion of an ontology ‘view’ is not yet well
established. One approach follows database mechanisms
and queries [18]. A simpler but useful notion is to
provide alternative axes for different uses – structure,
function, use, organisational role, etc. If the different
modules are clearly separated, then constructing such axes
is simply a matter of defining the relevant abstractions, 


The ability of logical reasoners to link independent
ontology modules to allow them to be separately
maintained, extended, and re-used is one of their most
powerful features. However, to achieve this end all
information must be explicit and available to both
reasoners and authors. 

# Highlights

Modularity is a key requirement for large ontologies in
order to achieve re-use, maintainability, and evolution. 


# Comments

## Tags
- 1.2.2. Computational ontologies and their methods

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q29027414)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q29027414)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q29027414/P921%3BP4510)  
