
CIViC is a community knowledgebase for expert crowdsourcing the clinical interpretation of variants in cancer
=============================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q29178984]  
  
Publication date : 31 of January, 2017  

# Highlights

The biomedical literature describing such associations is large and  growing  rapidly.  As  a  result,  the  inter-pretation  of  individual  variants  observed  in  patients  has  become  a  bottleneck  in  clinical  sequencing workflows

 resources  often have barriers to widespread adoption, including  some  combination  of  (i)  no  pub-lic  access  to  content,  (ii)  restrictive  content  licenses, (iii) no public API, (iv) no bulk data download capabilities and (v) no mechanism for  rapid  improvement  of  the  content  (see  Supplementary Table 1 for detailed feature comparison). To address these limitations, we present CIViC, an open-access, open-source knowledgebase for expert crowdsourcing of Clinical Interpretation of Variants in Cancer (http://civicdb.org/; Fig. 1)

gure 1  Contribution of CIViC to the precision cancer treatment cycle. T

 --> Fun infographict

 Software developmentGitHub serves both as a host for CIViC’s two code repositories, and as a help and support center for bug reports and support requests
e. The target audience of CIViC is delib-erately broad, encompassing researchers, clini-cians and patient advocates.

Each variant is associated with a single gene, and each gene view provides a curated ‘gene  summary’  synthesizing  all  of  the  vari-ants it contains. Additional gene information is imported through the MyGene.info annotation API12, allowing users to focus curation effort on clinical impact and not repeat the efforts of other databases

6. Open license. CIViC will encourage both academic and commercial engagement through flexible licensing. Access will not be restricted by exclusive licensing

From  the  public  launch  of  CIViC  in  June  2015  to  December  2016,  external  curators  (not  affiliated  with  Washington  University)  contributed  46.7%  of the evidence statements within the knowl-edgebase (Supplementary Fig. 6b).

  We  are  addressing  each  of  these  challenges  by  engagement  with  other  resources, experts and funding agencies with track  records  of  long-term  maintenance  of 

  While there are many challenges faced by an effort such as this one, we hope that, with input from a critical mass of interested parties, these challenges can be largely overcome. We invite all researchers, healthcare providers and patient advocates engaged in clinical interpre-tation  of  variants  to  join  the  community  at  CIViC (http://civicdb.org/)
# Comments

## Tags


3.2.2. Community curation and gamified science

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q29178984)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q29178984)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q29178984/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q29178984&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
