
A transcriptome database for astrocytes, neurons, and oligodendrocytes: a new resource for understanding brain development and function
=======================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q29547320]  

# Highlights

We used FACS (fluorescent-activated cell sorting) to isolate astrocytes from transgenic mice that express enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) under the control ofan S100␤promoter. Using Affymetrix GeneChip Arrays, we then created a transcriptome database ofthe expression levels of⬎20,000 genes by gene profiling these three main CNS neural cell types at various postnatal ages.

We found that Aldh1L1 is a highly specific antigenicmarker for astrocytes witha substantiallybroader pattern ofastrocyte expression than the traditional astrocyte marker GFAP.

This transcriptome database of acutely isolated purified astrocytes, neurons, and oligodendrocytes provides a resource to the neuroscience community by providing improved cell-type-specific markers and for better understanding of neural development, function, and disease.

Genome-wide transcriptional profiling has recently emerged
as a powerful tool for better understanding the development and function of defined cell types. 

--> Better defined than in scRNA-seq!

we have identified thousands of new cell-type-enriched genes, thereby providing important new information about astrocyte, OL, and neuron

FACS purification of astrocytes. Dissociated forebrains from S100 beta-EGFPmice sequentially incubated on the following panning plates: secondary antibody only plate to deplete microglia, O4 plate to deplete OLs, PDGFR␣plate to deplete OPCs, and a second O4 plate to deplete any remaining OLs.

FACS purification of neurons. EGFP negative cells cells from S100␤-EGFP dissociated forebrain were FACS  purified in parallel with astrocyte purification and were sorted based on their negative EGFP immunofluorescence.

These purification methods for astrocytes, neurons, and OLs rely on known cell-type-specific markers. To

Figure 2. Dendrogram and sample clustering ofpurified CNS cell types. Hierarchical cluster- ing of highly purified CNS cell type samples from different developmental stages reveals three distinct clusters representing astrocytes, neurons, and oligodendrocytes

--> Nice separation per dev. stage! 

The similarity within cell types is in contrast to the large differ- ences found between astrocytes, neurons, and OLs. Interestingly, the correlation between pairwise comparisons of astrocytes and OLs is not any stronger than the pairwise correlation ofeither of these cell types with neurons. Considering the highly specialized functions ofeach ofthese mature CNS cell types, it should not be unexpected that their gene expression profiles are highly diver- gent and that each represents an equally unique cell type.

Although our data does not address the question ofa com- mon lineage of astrocytes and OLs, these data indicate that ma- ture astrocytes and OLs do not share a large cohort of common “glial” genes, and suggests that the notion of a molecularly de- fined glial cell type is largely misleading because all three mature cell types differ vastly based on the genes that they express.

The top 40 astrocyte, neuron, and OL cell-type-specific genes are shown in the heat map in Figure 3, and the top 250 genes appear in supplemental Figure S3 (available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material). As expected, the top 40 cell-type-specific genes include well established cell type specific markers, verifying our isolation procedure.

We next performed in situ hybridization (ISH) to confirm some ofthe new cell-type-specific genes in the CNS (Fig. 4). ISH for several arbitrarily selected genes identified as being highly enriched in neurons (Fig. 4A–F, Nov, Tmem130, and Brunol4) confirmed in all three cases that the genes had an expression pattern consistent with neuron-specific expression, although the distribution between neuronal subtypes varied between genes

The ABA informatics filter identifies genes with similar spatial distribution patterns. Training these filters with the ISH pattern for established cell-type-specific markers was used to pre- dict new cell-type-enriched genes (Lein et al., 2007)

To characterize new astrocyte-specific markers, we examined our gene expression database to identify astrocyte-specific genes with the highest levels of mRNA expression, widest patterns of ISH labeling throughout the brain, and proteins expected to be ex- pressed throughout the whole cell (i.e., not restricted to cellular subcompartments).

Immunohistochem- ical staining with an Aldh1L1-specific polyclonal antibody re- vealed the highly branched astrocyte morphology, including the astrocyte cell body and its extensive processes. In contrast, GFAP antibodies primarily labeled the thick main processes of some astrocytes. All cells positive for GFAP are also labeled with Aldh1L1, whereas Aldh1L1 strongly labels many more astrocytes.

The list of genes specific to OLs indicates that, in contrast to the list of astrocyte- and neuron-enriched genes, many of the cell- type-specific genes in OLs have been previously characterized. Fifty cell-type-specific genes (⬎20-fold enrichment) were iden- tified. Ofthese genes, 16 are previously well established OL genes such as myelin-associated oligodendrocytic basic protein (Mobp), Transferrin (Trf), and Claudin 11 (Cldn11). More than half of these 50 OL-specific genes are associated with the term “membrane” in the DAVID database (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf. gov/), perhaps not surprisingly given the highly specialized func- tion ofOLs in myelin membrane formation.

Our findings, combined with the ISH patterns on the ABA, demonstrate that widely used neuronal markers such as Map2, Tau, HuC/Elav3, Gap43, Prpc, and voltage-dependent so- dium channels are not specifically expressed by neurons, and that many specific neuronal genes such as Eno3/NSE, Camk2, and neurofilament chains L, M, and H are only expressed by subsets of neurons. As confirmed by our profiles, many synaptic vesicle proteins such as synaptotagmin I (Syt1) are specifically and broadly expressed by neurons, but, because of their synapse ac- cumulation, are not useful for identification ofneuronal cell bod- ies in cryosections.

The neuronal gene that we identified as most highly, specifically, and broadly expressed in our profiles was stathmin-like-2 (see ABA), also known as Scg10.

More than half of the genes most downregulated during as-
trocyte development are also downregulated during OL develop- ment, and many ofthese genes are involved in the cell cycle.

Primary cultures ofastroglia (McCarthyand de Vellis, 1980) have long served as an in vitro proxy for studying in vivo astrocytes, however, the relationship between preparations of cultured as- troglia to normally functioning astrocytes is poorly understood.

Based on their gene expression profiles, this data suggests that cultured astroglia and in vivo astrocytes are as different from each other as OPCs are from OLs.

Although their expression is similar, it is clear that some astrocyte genes are not expressed by cultured astroglia, whereas some genes expressed by cultured astroglia are not expressed by astrocytes in vivo.

These results clearlyshowthat cultured astrogliadonot represent the same cell type as in vivo astrocytes, but instead represent an astrocyte-like cell type.

current markers for astrocytes are either not uniformly expressed in all astrocytes, or do not fully label both the astrocyte cell body and all processes. For example, GFAP, the most widely used astrocyte marker, is preferentially expressed in white matter over gray matter astro- cytes and does not label all processes (Bushong et al., 2002). Sim- ilarly, aquaporin 4, although highly astrocyte specific, is localized to astrocyte endfeet. Connexin 43 only labels some astrocytes and is also expressed by endothelial cells, and although S100␤labels both gray matter and white matter astrocytes, it also labels OPCs and OLs. Here, we identified Aldh1L1 as a highly useful new astrocyte-
specific marker
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q29547320)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q29547320)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q29547320/P921%3BP4510)  
