
A gene expression atlas of the central nervous system based on bacterial artificial chromosomes
===============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q29617753]  

# Highlights

Here we describe a large-scale screen to create an atlas of CNS gene expression at the cellular level, and to provide a library of verified bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) vectors and transgenic mouse lines that offer experimental access to CNS regions, cell classes and pathways.

The development of transgenic mouse methodology for reporter gene analysis using precisely modified BACs offers a new method for correlation ofgene expression with cell type, because the elaborate specializations of morphologically complex cells can be visualized.

The Gene Expression Nervous System Atlas (GENSAT) BAC Transgenic Project is designed to take advantage of these features of EGFP reporter genes to provide detailed expression maps for thousands of genes.

In our experience so far, ,85% ofBACs chosen using these general parameters express reproducibly in multiple transgenic lines. Those that do not express reproducibly owing to position effects on integration into the genome are easily identified, because the sites of expression vary significantly between lines.

One of the most striking advantages of the BAC constructs is the ability to visualize small cohorts of cells that express a particular gene and to follow their development over time

Only two cells expressing EGFP were detected in serial sections of a whole Gscl BAC transgenic embryo. These cells are present in the ventricular zone at the border of the developing mesencephalon and metencephalon, as expected from visualization of the expanding IPN progenitor pool in E15.5 embryos. These results suggest that Gscl is a lineage marker for a specific class of neurons that arise in the ventricular zone at E10.5, establish a progenitor pool that is still differentiating and migrating into the presumptive IPN at E15.5

--> Markers for a _class_ of neurons. I like their usage of terms in this work.

The identifi- cation of Gscl expression in a small population of neurons in the IPN suggests a functional role for Gscl that has not been tested in any of the studies done to assess the consequences of loss of Gscl function in vivo. For example, loss of this small cell population as a consequence of Gscl deletion would be missed unless specific markers that identify this cell type were examined in the knockout animals.

Sema3b marked the projection neurons from the pontine nucleus, the vestibular nucleus and the spinocerebellar tract (Fig. 3a). This distribution is particularly interesting, as each of the Sema3b-expressing cell types in the brainstem, spinal cord and cerebellum provide presynaptic contacts to cerebellar granule cells.

By P7, Pde1c-expressing cells persisted in layer 1 ofthe cortex, suggesting they are the SGL cell population because these cells persist longer than pioneer neurons, which are thought to disappear by birth. Thus, Pde1c marks this previously unstudied cell population and provides a means to study the dynamics ofthe proliferation and migration of these cells.

a MySQL database of the full-scale TIFF images, which can be viewed in browser format online (http:// www.gensat.org/), has been generated to allow public access to the GENSAT data and for the design of further experiments.

--> Database still on! 


Second, the ability to visualize individual cells using the EGFP
reporter has revealed that a large number ofthe genes studied so far are expressed in novel subsets of classically defined cell types. It is apparent from these data that these subsets of cells can also share other important features; for example, they may all project to the same area of the CNS, or expression may mark distinct subpopu- lations in multiple CNS structures. We believe that, in many cases, these differences portend distinct functional properties, and antici- pate that similar subdivisions of classical cell types will be observed as these methods are applied to other organ systems. __This will require careful reconsideration of the meaning and definition of specific cell types in vivo.__

--> Yeah! 

We view the GENSAT BAC Transgenic Project as complementary to ongoing, large-scale directed and non-directed phenotypic screens to test CNS gene function. It is our hope that the examples we have discussed and the data we have released will accelerate research in all areas of neuroscience, and that access to the BAC vectors and transgenic lines we have produced will stimulate the fusion of mammalian molecular genetics and functional analysis of CNS cells and circuits

# Comments
GENSAT database is also a source of cell type markers.