
Semantic integration of gene expression analysis tools and data sources using software connectors.
==================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q30570244]  

# Highlights

Semantic integration enables the assignment of unambiguous meanings to data shared among different applications in an integrated environment, allowing the exchange of data in a semantically consistent and meaningful way. This work aims at developing an ontology-based methodology for the semantic integration of gene expression analysis tools.

: The proposed methodology facilitates the development of connectors capable of semantically integrating different gene expression analysis tools and data sources.

In most cases biologists have to use different, isolated ana- lysis tools. In those cases, biologists must frequently implement themselves, without proper guidelines, the necessary code to integrate those tools, which can hin- der effective research [18]. 

we can identify two general ontol- ogy-based approaches for the integration of bioinformatics systems and databases [27]. In the first approach, ontolo- gies have been used as source for the design of a common or reference (database) model shared by a number of related tools or databases (e.g., [20,28-32]). In the second approach, ontologies have been used as basis for the devel- opment of mediators, i.e., software entities that encom- passes a global knowledge (global database schema) and, at the same time, are able to provide mappings to the spe- cific (local) schemas to be integrated (e.g., [33-36])

Software connectors represent architectural elements used to model interactions among either computation or data compo- nents of a system.

Software architecture emmerged as a sub-discipline of software engeneering in the early 90’s. This discipline is focused, among others, on the architecture description of complex systems and on the use of this description as basis for system design, development, reuse and man- agement in general [37].

A connector can be as sim- ple as a global variable (shared memory) or procedure call or as complex as a P2P-based data distribution.

The class gene expression value represents a value obtained by quantifying the functional products produced by a gene as a result of its expression (relationship quantifies).

The complete OWL specification of the Gene Expression Ontology, including the definition of a SAGE experi- mental process, can be found in a supplementary material.

We applied the proposed methodology in the develop- ment of three integration scenarios for the analysis of different types of gene expression data

We have developed an ontology-based methodology for the semantic integration of gene expression analysis tools and data sources using software connectors.

In many occasions, inte- gration is carried out by someone with insufficient knowledge of the target domain. Even if a domain expert is available, the absence of a systematic approach towards integration favours the arising of (semantical) inconsis- tencies because integration is based only on tacit knowl- edge. Our methodology enforces the use of explicit knowledge, since conceptual models must be developed to represent input and output data items.


# Comments
