
EDAM: an ontology of bioinformatics operations, types of data and identifiers, topics and formats
=================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q30597346]  
  
Publication date : 11 of March, 2013  

# Highlights
EDAM is an ontology of bioinformatics operations (tool or
workflow functions), types of data and identifiers, application domains
and data formats. EDAM supports semantic annotation of diverse
entities such as Web services, databases, programmatic libraries,
standalone tools, interactive applications, data schemas, datasets
and publications within bioinformatics.


o ensure good coverage of common concepts, numerous
tools and databases have been semantically annotated with
EDAM.

Information standards such as those unified under MIBBI
(Minimum Information about a Biomedical or Biological Inves-
tigation, Taylor et al., 2008) define what information should be
recorded when reporting scientific experiments. For example,
MIGS (Minimum Information about a Genome Sequence) and
related MIxS standards require specific metadata for genomic
sequences (Field et al., 2008; Yilmaz et al., 2011).


Data models, schemas or exchange formats define structures
for data representation and enable convenient sharing between
tools.


Ontologies can be used to define data models, but more com-
monly they define collections of interrelated items. These range
from informal lists such as those used to categorize the articles in
journals, through Nucleic Acids Research’s hierarchies of data-
base and Web-server categories (Benson, 2011; Galperin and
Ferna ́ ndez-Sua ́ rez, 2012), to formal ontologies establishing
commonly understood meaning and relations of subjects in
focus.


o keep EDAM maintainable, agile software development methods are
used. This ensures that changes are delivered with good response time
using limited resources and yielding consistent results. For example, re-
lations between concepts are explicitly defined only in one direction, to
minimize the possibility for inconsistencies and to ease maintenance.

DAM consists of four main sub-ontologies rooted in the top
level of its hierarchy: Operation, Data, Topic and Format (Table and Fig. 1). A fifth distinguishable sub-ontology is Identifier
rooted under Data. Operation concepts denote what function a
tool provides or how a piece of data was created. 

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q30597346)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q30597346)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q30597346/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q30597346&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTT113)  
