
Study of cell differentiation by phylogenetic analysis using histone modification data
======================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q30841360]  
  
Publication date : 08 of August, 2014  

# Highlights
e introduced and studied the novel problem of inferring cell type trees from histone modification
data. The promising results we obtain point the way to a new approach to the study of cell differentiation. We also
discuss how cell-type trees can be used to study the evolution of cell types.

In this paper, we provide a definition for a cell-type tree.
Cell-type trees are trees which represent the relationships between various cell-types. The nodes of this tree represent cell-types while the edges between two nodes tell us
that one cell-type is differentiated from some cells of the
other cell-type.


--> I feel that this could be better worded

(It should be noted that we are interested here in populations of cells of a certain type, not all
coming from the same individual, rather than in developmental lineages of cells within one individual)

--> Confusing

We used data on a few histone modifications (but
mostly on H3K4me3) for many cell types, including replicate data, to construct cell-type trees—to our knowledge,
these are the first such trees produced by computational
methods. We show that preprocessing the data is very
important: not only are ChIP-Seq data fairly noisy, but
the ENCODE data are based on several individuals and
this adds an independent source of noise


--> First tree with relations between cell types? Really?

# Comments. 

Lots of analysis, interesting ideas, but not much I can use.

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q30841360)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q30841360)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q30841360/P921%3BP4510)  
