
Big data - a 21st century science Maginot Line? No-boundary thinking: shifting from the big data paradigm.
==========================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q30891300]  
  
Publication date : 06 of February, 2015  

# Highlight
The big data paradigm is putting the spirit of the Maginot Line into lots ofdata. Big data overall is disconnecting researchers and science challenges. Wepropose No-Boundary Thinking (NBT), applying no-boundary thinking in problemdefining to address science challenges.

By giving the French a false sense of security,theMaginot Line had the effect of draining resources from more flexible defensivestrategies. The return on investment turned out to be poor. Is the big data paradigmturning out to be a science Maginot Line?Only time will tell,but we are alreadybecoming aware of the limitations of this strategy.

Big data, admittedly, is a phenomenon.

What is needed are not more reports,more lists ofpublications,more software packages,and more data. Efforts like TCGA are reachingthe“bottleneck;”it is hard to make significant breakthroughs in scientific challengesby focusing on big data. Since interdisciplinary research does not work well,howabout post-interdisciplinary approaches such as transdisciplinary approaches[communication with a senior scientist]?Since many current methods andapproaches are generic,how about looking into more granular layers and finely-detailed approaches?


Many authors are beginning to point out the limitations of big data and that big datais not effective in solving certain problems (see the following several references [7-9]).“Big data has arrived, but big insights have not”[9]

Overall, we are concerned that the big data paradigm has taken a whole generation ofscience and research down the wrong path and given a false sense of progress,

Ratherthan looking for big data or software tools to provide a connection among researchersof related disciplines, with NBT, the connection will come about by defining scientificproblems to address science challenges.

. However, todayin the 21st century, the overall impact of the focus on big data and software is mislead-ing and confusing to researchers and students, making their strategies rigid, which lateron will have even broader negative impacts to science in science history.

# Comments

--> Well, it is a point, but not really an argument. 

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q30891300)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q30891300)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q30891300/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q30891300&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/S13040-015-0037-5)  
