
Character trees from transcriptome data: Origin and individuation of morphological characters and the so-called "species signal".
=================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q30980445]  
  
Publication date : 14 of July, 2015  

# Highlights

We
argue that concerted evolution of transcriptomes can explain the so-called “species signal” found
in several recent comparative transcriptome studies. The species signal is the phenomenon that
transcriptomes cluster by species rather than character type, even though the characters are older
than the respective species. We suggest the species signal is a natural consequence of concerted
gene expression evolution resulting from mutations that alter gene regulatory network
interactions shared by the characters under comparison. Thus, character trees generated from
transcriptomes allow us to investigate the variational independence, or individuation, of
morphological characters at the level of genetic programs

--> So interesting. Maybe implications for 2.4.4. A pragmatic definition of cell type


Transcriptomes provide a standardized method of comparison
for investigating the evolution of cell, tissue, and organ types
(hereafter referred to as morphological characters)

--> Grifo no types, muito bom

xhibit a higher degree of individuality.
Incomplete individuation has consequences for the interpretation of character trees generated from transcriptomes. Most
hierarchical clustering algorithms and phylogenetic reconstruction methods assume that a gene's expression changes independently in different characters. However, if characters are not fully
individuated, due to the sharing of gene regulatory network
interactions, then the assumption of independence among these
characters is violated. Evolutionary changes in gene expression
that occur simultaneously in multiple characters will, thus, be
treated as synapomorphies (shared derived traits), leading to the
erroneous conclusion that different characters within a species are
more closely related to each other than to the homologous
characters in a related species. We think this is the reason for the
species-specific clustering frequently observed in transcriptomic
data (Lin et al., 2014; Pankey et al., 2014; Tschopp et al., 2014; Yue
et al., 2014).

--> For bulk transcriptomics, another explanation is differences in cell type composition in organs and tissues (even when the cell types themselves are conserved). E.g. animal A has 3x more leukocytes in every tissue than animal B. 

A common feature of multicellular organisms is that they are
composed in large part of repetitions of the same or similar building blocks (Owen, '48; Remane, '56; Riedl, '78; Weiss, '90;
Raff, '96). Examples are the multitude of identical or similar cells
of most cell types tissue types such as smooth or skeletal muscles,
and more complex structures, such as the leaves on a plant, bird
feathers, or segments of annelid worms.

--> Good point

An analogy may
be made to gene duplication and divergence. However, there are
several important differences between genes and morphological
characters. These differences arise because genes reproduce
directly by semiconservative replication, whereas morphological
characters are recurring structures that must be rebuilt every generation.
The consequence is that gene duplication can result
in the immediate individuality of gene paralogs, with subsequent
mutations solely affecting one copy or the other. In contrast,
multiple instances of a morphological character are the result of
duplications occurring every generation by deployment of the
same gene regulatory network in different spatiotemporal
locations during development

--> Very well put

Morphological characters that lack individuation undergo concerted gene expression
evolution, as most mutations that affect the shared gene
regulatory network will result in gene expression changes across
multiple instances of the morphological character in the
individual

concerted evolution in ribosomal RNA genes is the result of unequal
crossing over and gene conversion. Thus, although the
mechanism for concerted evolution (or lack of individuation)
of ribosomal RNA genes differs from that of morphological
characters, it results in a common phylogenetic pattern where
copies of genes or characters within the same species are each
other's closest relatives

A large fraction of real characters,
however, are likely somewhere in-between the two extremes of
homomorph (i.e., identical) and paramorph (i.e., fully individuated) characters. They have acquired some degree of evolutionary individuality but still are highly likely to share derived
features because of the similarity of their gene regulatory

Figure 1. Cell type tree of metazoan photoreceptor cell types (after Arendt, 2008 with permission of Nature Publishing Group).
Photoreceptor cells come in two major clades, rhabdomeric and ciliary photoreceptor cells. Notably, certain vertebrate retinal interneurons
are closely related to rhabdomeric photoreceptors, and likely evolved from an ancestral rhabdomeric photoreceptor cell type. Internal nodes
in the tree represent ancestral cell types. Branching events represent either the origin of a cell type by bifurcation of an ancestral cell type, or
speciation events. Shading of lineages indicate taxa or groups of taxa.


--> This is worth going to Wikidata, 1.3.3. Wikidata as a platform for representation of biological knowledge

morphological character trees treat
morphological characters (e.g., cell, tissue, and organ types) as
operational taxonomic units, which are placed at the tips of the
tree. Generating these trees from transcriptome data requires
applying phylogenetic methods, for instance parsimony or
maximum likelihood, using a matrix composed of gene
expression values


In a recent example, Kin et al. (2015) generated a character tree
of mesenchymal cell types to test alternative hypotheses of the
origin of the endometrial stromal cell, as well as identify
regulatory molecules causally relevant to endometrial stromal
cell evolution

. Kin et al. (2015) found that endometrial
stromal cells and follicular dendritic cells formed a wellsupported clade, whereas a close relationship of endometrial
stromal cells and myofibroblasts was rejected

--> How to you talk about a "clade" for cell types?

There is, however, an alternative to log-transformation that
takes care of these pathologies. To our knowledge, this was first
pointed out by a blogger who goes by the name BAMseek on a
blog called Bridgecrest Bioinformatics in 2011, http://bridgecrest.
blogspot.com/, and advertised on SEQanswers. The simplest of
these transformations is the square-root transformation. For one, ffiffiffi
0 p ¼ 0 and thus even zero RNA abundances remain in the realm
of finite numbers. Even more importantly square-root transformations are actually variance stabilizing for RNA abundance
data, and avoid the inflation of variance at low levels (Fig. 5B).

For that reason, it is imperative to eplace the popular log-transformation by the better square-root
transformation in all applications where transformations are
desirable, like tests for differential expression or sample scatter
plots and similarity measures among samples (correlations).
These correlations can be used for hierarchical clustering, and
thus is one avenue to obtain classifications that could reflect
phylogenetic relationships

--> I've never seen that, but it makes sense, and is easier to understand than log transforms.

# Comments

Very good writing about cell type evolution. It is long, but worth it. I will have to re-read it in the future.


## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q30980445)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q30980445)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q30980445/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q30980445&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q30980445/P921%3BP4510)  
