
The interaction of domain knowledge and linguistic structure in natural language processing: interpreting hypernymic propositions in biomedical text.
=====================================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q31040294]  
  
Publication date : 01 of December, 2003  

# Highlights
Interpretation of semantic propositions in free-text documents such as MEDLINE citations would provide valuable support forbiomedical applications, and several approaches to semantic interpretation are being pursued in the biomedical informatics commu-nity. In this paper, we describe a methodology for interpreting linguistic structures that encode hypernymic propositions, in which amore specific concept is in a taxonomic relationship with a more general concept. 

 This is illustrated by therelationship betweenmodafinil(hyponym) andstimulant(hypernym) in the sentencemodafinil is a novel stimulantthat is effective in the treatment of narcolepsy.

 Our proposal for identifying and interpreting hyp-ernymic propositions is devised as an addition to ageneral knowledge-based semantic interpreter (calledSemRep) that uses underspecified syntactic analysis andstructured domain  knowledge from the UMLS toidentify semantic predications in biomedical text.

 Currently, when interpreting the sentence above,SemRep identifies the semantic proposition ‘‘StimulantsTREATS Narcolepsy.’’ Although this is correct, itwould be more useful to identify ‘‘Modafinil’’ (hyponymof ‘‘Stimulant’’) as the semantic subject of TREATS inthis sentence

Hearst [38] reports on other appositive patterns thatencode hypernymic propositions (although she does notaddress the general interpretation of these propositions)

e shall simply refer to the predicate of thehypernymic proposition as ISA, with the assumptionthat this is a cover term for what may in fact be severalsemantic values. Brachman [39] offers a number ofalternatives for the meaning of ISA, including ‘‘subset/superset,’’ ‘‘generalization/specialization,’’ and ‘‘kind-of.’’ B

--> "subclass of" is the term of the season

The UMLS has three components: the Metathesaurus,the Semantic Network, and the SPECIALIST Lexicon.


There are 134 semantic types inthe 2002 release of the UMLS, and the Semantic Net-work [46] organizes these into two single-inheritancehierarchies, one for entities and one for events. In ad-dition, associative relations are assigned between se-mantic types; these semantic propositions representknowledge that is accepted as being valid in the bio-medical domain, such as(10)ÔBody Part, Organ, or Organ Component HAS_-PART Cell.

 In the version ofthe program discussed here, we used only the groupChemicals and Drugs. This group consists of 26 se-mantic types, a few examples of which areÔPharmaco-logic  Substance,ÕÔAntibiotic,ÕÔBiologically  ActiveSubstance,ÕÔHormone,ÕÔEnzyme,ÕÔVitamin,ÕÔSteroid,ÕandÔImmunologic Factor.

 The results of a pre-liminary evaluation are encouraging and error analysisprovides a guide for improvements. The methodologydescribed can make a contribution to improvements inhigh quality natural language processing in the bio-medical domain, and has the potential to support arange of applications, including information retrievaland extraction as well as ontology engineering.

 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q31040294)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q31040294)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q31040294/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q31040294&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JBI.2003.11.003)  
