
Enriching a biomedical event corpus with meta-knowledge annotation.
===================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q31033181]  
  
Publication date : 10 of October, 2011  

# Highlights

Correct interpretation of these events is not possible
without additional information, e.g., does an event describe a fact, a hypothesis, an experimental result or an
analysis of results? How confident is the author about the validity of her analyses? These and other types of
information, which we collectively term meta-knowledge, can be derived from the context of the event.

To our knowledge, our scheme is unique within the
field with regards to the diversity of meta-knowledge aspects annotated for each event.


. The event trigger is a word or phrase in the
sentence which indicates the occurrence of the event,
and around which the other parts of the event are organised. The event type (generally assigned from an ontology) categorises the type of information expressed by
the event

The results suggest that ... This phrase allows
us to determine the following about the event that follows:
• It is based on an analysis of experimental results.
• It is stated with a certain amount of speculation
(according to the use of the verb suggest, rather than
a more definite verb, such as demonstrate).

The most common types of meta-knowledge annotated
correspond to either speculation/certainty level, e.g.,
[22,23], or general information content/rhetorical intent,
e.g., background, methods, results, insights, etc. This latter type of annotation has been attempted both on
abstracts [33,34] and full papers [


  Knowledge Type (KT)

  ur KT
dimension attempts to identify a small number of more
general information types that can be used to characterise events, regardless of the zone in which they occur

• Investigation: Enquiries or investigations, which
have either already been conducted or are planned for
the future, typically accompanied by lexical clues like
examined, investigated and studied, etc.
• Observation: Direct observations, sometimes represented by lexical clues like found, observed and report,
etc. Event triggers in the past tense typically also
describe observations.
• Analysis: Inferences, interpretations, speculations or
other types of cognitive analysis, always accompanied by
lexical clues, typical examples of which include suggest,
indicate, therefore and conclude, etc.
• Method: Events that describe experimental methods.
Denoted by trigger words that describe experimental
methods, e.g., stimulate, addition.
• Fact: Events that describe general facts and wellestablished knowledge, typically denoted by present
tense event triggers that describe biological processes,
and sometimes accompanied by the lexical clue known.
• Other: The default category, assigned to events that
either do not fit into one of the above categories, do not
express complete information, or whose KT is unclear
or is assignable from the context. These are mostly nonpropositional events, i.e., events which cannot be
ascribed a truth value due to lack of available (contextual) information.


 we plan to
work on the development of a machine learning system
that can predict meta-knowledge information for events,
trained on our annotated corpu

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q31033181)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q31033181)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q31033181/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Enriching%20a%20biomedical%20event%20corpus%20with%20meta-knowledge%20annotation.'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
