
GiniClust: detecting rare cell types from single-cell gene expression data with Gini index.
===========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q31111856]  

# Highlights

High-throughput single-cell technologies have great potential to discover new cell types; however, it remains challenging to detect rare cell types that are distinct from a large population.

Cell types that play an important role in development
or disease progression often have low abundance. Examples of such rare cell types include stem and progenitor
cells

To overcome this limitation, we have developed a
new approach to systematically identify genes that are
specific to rare cell types. The Gini index [16], which
was originally developed to study social inequality, has
been used to identify countries whose wealth is concentrated by a small number of individuals (http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.GINI/) and is particularly
suitable for identifying rare cell-type-specific genes. For
each gene X, we sort cells based on its expression levels
from the lowest to the highest and then evaluate the cumulated expression levels of X as more and more cells are included from the ranked list.

We computed the bidirectional Gini index values in order to identify genes
that were either upregulated (direction = 1) or downregulated (direction = –1) in rare cell populations

Traditional clustering methods are effective for identifying
large clusters but are not suitable for detecting rare cell
clusters, mainly because the feature selection is insensitive
to the presence of rare cell clusters. We have proposed to
use the Gini index as the basis to select rare cell-typespecific genes and have shown that this approach is effective in all the datasets analyzed here
# Comments
1.4.2

They say "detect rare cell type" when they actually mean detect clusters with few cells.

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q31111856)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q31111856)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q31111856/P921%3BP4510)  
