
Literature-Based Discovery of Confounding in Observational Clinical Data
========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q31172385]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2016  

# Highlights

Confounding is present when factors aside from the given predictor(s) affect the response of interest. However, these additional factors may not be known at the outset. In this paper, we present a scalable literature-based confounding variable discovery method for biomedical research applications with pharmacovigilance as our use case. 

. In this paper, we apply our method to pharmacovigilance (PV). However, confounding is a challenge to multiple fields including epidemiology, biosurveillance and pharmacogenomics.

Some 770,000 adverse drug events (ADEs) occur annually in the United States alone

 Clinical text (notes) recorded in EHRs are another potential primary source of ADE data, yet drawing reliable conclusions from routinely collected clinical data is notoriously difficult

 
Derivation of CVCs from the literature. We developed an LBD-based method that automates CVD using “false discovery patterns” (FDPs), leveraging existing NLP tools and knowledge resources.

FDPs that were used to identify CVCs and how they may relate to different types of confounding.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q31172385)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q31172385)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q31172385&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
