
Identifiers for the 21st century: How to design, provision, and reuse persistent identifiers to maximize utility and impact of life science data
================================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q33037209]  

# Highlights
We outline 10 lessons we have learned about the identifier qualities and best practices that facilitate large-scale data integration.

readers have always required persistentidenti- fiers in order to efficiently and reliably retrieve cited works. “Desultory citation practices” have been thwarting scholarship for millennia [1]

Typically, such an identifier is not only persistent but also actionable [7]: it is a UniformResourceIdentifier(URI)[8], oftype hypertext transfer protocols (http/s), that, at a minimum, you can paste in a web browser address bar.

Throughout this document, the word “must” is reserved for practices that ensure against
the collision, ambiguity, or inaccessibility ofitems referenced by identifiers; instances of “must” are also often specific to particular design choices. We use the word “should” to convey that the trade-offs must be understood and carefully weighed before choosing a different course (e.g., consistent with IETF RFC2119 [16]).

--> Nice explanation

Whether or not you create a new identifier, it is vital to credit any derived content in a way that includes its indigenousidentifiers
--> I`m not sure I know what indigenous identifiers are.

Persistent
The identifier must NOT be deleted (but may be deprecated).
Web-resolvable 
The URI must be resolvable to a web address where the data or information about the entry can be accessed.

URIs are identifiers that resolve on the web. “Cool URIs don’t change” [6] because when
they do change (or disappear) all existing references break. Thus, ifyou are a database provider, it is in your best interests to document and preferably register (a) the prefix (Fig 1) that you would like others to use and (b) its binding to a URI pattern (Fig 1)

When designing new local IDs or http URIs, avoid embedding meaning or relying on it for identifier uniqueness. Instead, favor opaque identifiers and convey meaning in the entity’s metadata; some metadata (such as resource type) can and should be conveyed in the HTTP header where possible [24].

Document your chosen version management practice: ifyou issue identifiers, the change history for the entity should be either documented or retrievable with a URL-based query.

--> Wikibase keeps it, so a good option in that sense too.

Identifiers that you have exposed publicly, whether as http URIs or via APIs, may be deprecated but must never be deleted or reassigned to another record.

Better identifier design, provisioning, documentation, and referencing can address many of the identifier problems encountered in the life science data cycle—leading to more efficient and effective science. However, best practices will not be adopted on the basis of their community benefit alone; the practices must be both easy and rewarding to the groups that do the implementing

# Comments

I had read it before in 17/09/2020