
Comparison of concept recognizers for building the Open Biomedical Annotator.
=============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q33504367]  
  
Publication date : 17 of September, 2009  

# Highlights

We utilize a number of data sources and dictionaries to evaluate the concept
recognizers in terms of precision, recall, speed of execution, scalability and customizability. Our
evaluations demonstrate that Mgrep has a clear edge over MetaMap for large-scale service oriented
applications.

We have subsequently used Mgrep to build the Open Biomedical Annotator service. The Annotator
service has access to a large dictionary of biomedical terms derived from the United Medical
Language System (UMLS) and NCBO ontologies. The Annotator also leverages the hierarchical
structure of the ontologies and their mappings to expand annotations.


A critical step that our system performs is to recognize a
given ontology concept in the text metadata of a record in
some online data resource. This task is generally referred to
as concept recognition. A core aspect of concept recognition
is a lexicon (or dictionary) usually derived from taxonomy
or ontology to which text is mapped. In the biomedical
domain, the United Medical Language System (UMLS) is
an extensive resource that incorporates a number of
disparate terminologies and ontologies and that provides
a cross-referencing of related concepts. However, efforts to
map public, open biomedical resources to semantically
rich thesauri such as the UMLS metathesaurus have been
scattered. Barring a few initiatives, [1,4] most efforts to date
have focused on mapping text from patient records to
UMLS, rather than on mapping metadata from online
biomedical resources [5,6].

. As most of the work in
biomedical informatics has primarily focused in recognizing genes or proteins [7] the dictionaries for genomics
and proteomics are comprehensive and extensively
evaluated. The same is not true for dictionaries pertaining to diseases, body parts, biological processes, drug
names, and so on

--> And cell types, by the way.


Currently, there are over 1000 public biomedical data
resources listed in the Nucleic Acids Research (NAR)
online Molecular Biology Database Collection. There are
many more that are not listed by NAR. Across all such
databases, ontology based annotation of their records is
not as widespread as desired. There are several reasons
for this limitation:
• Annotation often needs to be done manually either
by expert curators or by the authors of the data (e.g.,
when a new Medline entry is created, it is manually
indexed with MeSH terms);
• The number of biomedical ontologies available for
use is large; ontologies change often and frequently
overlap. The ontologies are not in the same format
and are not always accessible via Application
Programming Interfaces (APIs).
• Annotation is often a boring additional task
without immediate reward for the use

 For
instance, if data are annotated with a concept from the
NCI Thesaurus, such as melanoma, this component
generates a new annotation with the term skin neoplasm,
because the NCI Thesaurus provides the knowledge that
melanoma is a kind of skin neoplasm. A semanticdistance component uses a given notion of concept
similarity (or semantic distance) to obtain related
concepts and create new annotations

Annotator Web service workflow. The figure shows the Annotator Web service workflow. First, direct annotations are
created from raw text based on syntactic concept recognition according to a dictionary that use terms (concept names and
synonyms) from both UMLS and NCBO ontologies. Second, different components expand the first set of annotations
using ontology semantics (e.g., subsumption relationships and mappings between ontologies).


--> Cool Figure 2


Ontology based annotation of biomedical data plays a
crucial role for enabling data interoperability and the
making of translational discoveries [1]. This situation is
also true for e-science generally. The need to switch from
the current Web to a semantic Web with semantically
rich content annotated using ontologies has been clearly
identified [24]. Meeting this need requires services
(usable by humans and software agents) that can be
integrated into existing data curation and annotation
workflows.




# Comments

## Tags
1.3. Knowledge Representation in biology
1.3.1.5. UMLS, NCiT and non-OBO resources
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q33504367)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q33504367)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q33504367/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Comparison%20of%20concept%20recognizers%20for%20building%20the%20Open%20Biomedical%20Annotator.'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
