
A classification of diabetic foot infections using ICD-9-CM codes: application to a large computerized medical database
=======================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q33625951]  
  
Publication date : 06 of July, 2010  

# Highlights
We used the (VA) Diabetes Epidemiology Cohorts (DEpiC) database to conduct a retrospective
observational study of patients with diabetic foot infections

There were 61,007 patients with foot infections, of which 42,063 were classifiable into one of our
predefined groups. The different types of infection were related to expected patient characteristics, diagnostic
procedures, treatments, and outcomes. Our severity ranking showed a monotonic relationship to hospital length of
stay, amputation rate, transition to long-term care, and mortality.

We then examined all
the ICD-9-CM codes that had been assigned to these
patients in the 90 days before the amputation code
appeared in the database. We expected that codes for
foot infection would appear, because foot infections are
a frequent cause of amputation. Finally, we classified the
resulting ICD-9-CM codes for foot infection into two
groups, specific and moderately specific.

These findings corroborate our severity ranking. They
also confirm our ability to categorize infections correctly, because it would not be possible to create a
workable ranking otherwise.

We have developed a classification system for patients
with diabetic foot infections for use with large, computerized, administrative medical databases.
# Comments

ICD-9-CM is the official system of assigning codes to diagnoses and procedures associated with hospital utilization in the United States. The ICD-9 was used to code and classify mortality data from death certificates until 1999, when use of ICD-10 for mortality coding started.
## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q33625951)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q33625951)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q33625951&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6963-10-192)  
