
Two physically, functionally, and developmentally distinct peritoneal macrophage subsets.
=========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q33664675]  
  
Publication date : 25 of January, 2010  

# Highlights

The peritoneal cavity (PerC) is a unique compartment within whicha variety of immune cells reside, and from which macrophages(MØ) are commonly drawn for functional studies. Here we definetwo MØ subsets that coexist in PerC in adult mice. One, provision-ally called the large peritoneal MØ (LPM), contains approximately90% of the PerC MØ in unstimulated animals but disappears rap-idly from PerC following lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or thioglycolatestimulation


The second subset, referred toas small peritoneal MØ (SPM), expresses substantially lower levelsof CD11b and F4/80 but expresses high levels of MHC-II, which isnot expressed on LPM.

Approximately 40% of the PerC cells are B-lymphocytes(CD19+; Fig. 1, second row). Among the remaining“non-B”PerCcells, the majority coexpress CD11b and F4/80 and hence areappropriately characterized as MØ

The quantitative expression of a series of other well knownsurface markers also distinguishes SPMs from LPMs (Table 1).Notably, CD40, CD80, CD86, CD11c (N418 MAb), and TLR4are all expressed at higher levels on LPMs than SPMs


Eosinophils, which are commonly found in PerC, will con-taminate the SPM and LPM compartments unless explicitlyexcluded by the gating strategy


SPM  and  LPM  Are  Present  in  All  Mouse  Strains  Tested.SPMs andLPMs are detectable in PerC from all of the strains analyzed inthis study, including BALB/c, C57BL/6, 129/S6, FVB/N, SJL/J,and RAG−/−(Fig. S4). The relatively constant frequencies ofthese subsets in PerC, and their similar proportionality amongnon-B PerC leukocytes suggests that there may be an evolu-tionary advantage to maintenance of the composition of theapparently free-living peritoneal leukocytes.

--> Dang, that is cool and complete. That is a _super_ good example for 2.4.4.2. Names for different classes of types

Phenotypic and functional evidence presented here demon-strates that there are two distinct subsets of MØ in the mousePerC. 

Conversely, our demonstration that approximately half of theSPMs in PerC express the L-selectin CD62L (Fig. S3) supportsthe idea that appropriately stimulated SPMs may migrate tolymph nodes and serve as antigen-presenting cell.





# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q33664675)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q33664675)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q33664675/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q33664675&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
