
Logical development of the cell ontology.
=========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q33786317]  

# Highlights


Here we report on the generation of computable definitions for the hematopoietic cell types in the CL. 
Computable definitions for over 340 CL classes have been created using a genus-differentia approach.

new cell type classes were needed to accommodate species-specific expression of cellular markers.

First developed in 2004, the CL is composed of about 1000 classes connected via is_a and develops_from relationships.

The initial classification was done manually and not in accordance with commonly accepted ontology engineering principles such as normalization and modularity.
The resulting ontology contained numerous mistakes and omissions, and proved difficult to maintain and extend.

Computable definitions (sometimes called “logical definitions” or “cross-products”) are treated as equivalence relationships between the defined class and
some conjunction of classes. For example, the class “nucleate erythrocyte” can be defined as equivalent to the class of things that are both erythrocytes and that
have a nucleus as a part.

Our computable definitions all follow a genus-differentia structure, in which a class is defined by refining an existing more general class (the genus - in the above example this would be “erythrocyte”) and one or more differentiating characteristics (the differentiae - in the above example this is the has_part relationship to nucleus).

They defined dendritic cell types using cell surface expression of proteins as a major axis of differentia. 
Thus, a “CD8_alpha-negative, CD11b-negative dendritic cell” is a “conventional dendritic cell” (the genus) that “lacks_plasma_membrane_part CD8_alpha.

Some of our definitions also made use of negative criteria - for example, an alveolar macrophage is partially defined as a tissue-resident macrophage that lacks che-mokine receptor CX3CR1 on its plasma membrane.

The only similarity in cell surface markers between mouse and human HSC is that neither express cell surface proteins associated with fully differentiated immune cells (CD3epsilon, CD19, etc), a characteristic researchers call lineage-negative (lin-). Human HSC express CD34 and lack expression of CD38 on their cell surface whereas mouse HSC express other proteins, Kit and Spa-1, on their cell surface.

The transitive nature of the develops_from relationship allowed the reasoner to infer develops_from relationships between classes that are separated by multiple levels in the asserted is_a hierarchy. Errors that contradict biological knowledge were checked by using disjointness constraints.

Computable definitions can reveal ambiguities in how a cell type is defined by a curator. 
One example is the cell types “natural T regulatory cell” (nTregs) and “induced regulatory cell” (iTregs). Because the cell types have the same is_a parent and share two cell surface markers, the reasoner inferred the former to be a subtype of the latter in an earlier version of the ontology, violating a disjointness constraint existing between the two classes.

Some ambiguities resulted from how a cell type is defined in the scientific literature. 
The automated reasoning for the “mature NKTcell” provided an interesting example. 

Investigation of the literature revealed that the name “natural killer T cell” is controversial; 
the origin of the name “NK T” cell refers to cell surface expression of the NK1.1 protein and was not intended to imply a direct link to natural killer cells [21]. 

However some researchers feel there is enough functional overlap between “NK-” and “NK T-” cell types to justify the “natural killer T cell” moniker [21]. 

In Hemo_CL, the synonym is left in place as it reflects common usage, but NK T cell types and natural killer cell types are kept in separate branches of the ontology as inferred by the reasoner.

Computable definitions for hematopoietic cell types have importance beyond ontology maintenance and integration for the wider scientific community. 

We believe hypothesis- generation represents a future use of well-structured biomedical ontologies that have computable definitions.

We generated new hematopoietic cell types to represent entities described in current research and added computable definitions for all hematopoietic cell types using classes from other OBO library ontologies.

### Comments

An "explicit definition" is somewhat a looser version of a "computable definition".  

# Tags
- 1.3.1.4. Cell Ontology (and CELDA)

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q33786317)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q33786317)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q33786317/P921%3BP4510)  
