
Focusing on optic tectum circuitry through the lens of genetics
===============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q33709610]  
  
Publication date : 28 of September, 2010  

# Highlights
The new emphasis has been on
the specific function of neuronal cell types, which can
now be reproducibly labeled, imaged and manipulated
using genetic and optical techniques. Here, we
discuss recent advances and emerging experimental
approaches for studying tectal circuits as models for
visual processing and sensorimotor transformation by
the vertebrate brain.

The zebrafish has emerged as a valuable model system
with which we can hope to close this gap [4-7]. 

Ten different anatomical areas have been identified that serve
as targets for the retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons that
connect the eye to the brain [8] (Figure 1b). These ten
arborization fields, referred to as AF1 to AF10, probably
correspond to the primary visual nuclei identified in
adult teleost fish and are homologous to areas in
mammals, such as the suprachiasmatic nuclei (AF1), the
pretectal nucleus of the optic tract (AF9) and the superior
colliculus/optic tectum (AF10)


Here, we focus on the larval zebrafish tectum (AF10), a
structure suitable for circuit analyses.

The zebrafish larval tectum is roughly divided into two
regions, a deep cell body layer, the stratum peri­
ventriculare (SPV), and a superficial neuropil area, which
contains the dendrites and axons of tectal neurons, a
sparse assortment of tectal interneurons and afferent
axons arriving at the tectum, chiefly from the retina

Most (80%) RGC axons innervate three sublayers of the stratum fibrosum
et griseum superficiale (SFGS). A smaller number (15%)
innervate the most superficial stratum opticum (SO).

A sampling of neuron morphologies observed in the larval zebrafish tectum using ‘genetic Golgi’ methods. These include: radial glia (RG), periventricular projection neurons (PVPNs), periventricular interneurons (PVINs) and superficial interneurons (SINs). Retinorecipient laminae in the tectum are indicated by shading. Note the diverse dendrite morphologies of both projection neurons and interneurons in the tectum. In particular, PVINs have been observed containing arbors that are non-stratified (nsPVINs), mono-stratified (msPVINs) or bi-stratified (bsPVINs).


--> Beautiful figure


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q33709610)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q33709610)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q33709610&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1741-7007-8-126)  
