
Revisiting enigmatic cortical calretinin-expressing interneurons
================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q33796214]  

# Highlights
Cortical calretinin (CR)-expressing interneurons represent a heterogeneous subpopulation of about 10–30% of GABAergic interneurons, which altogether total ca. 12–20% of all cortical neurons.

They mainly originate from the caudal ganglionic eminence (CGE) but a subpopulation also derives from the dorsal part of the medial ganglionic eminence (MGE). Cortical GABAergic CR-expressing interneurons can be divided in two main populations: VIP-bipolar interneurons deriving from the CGE and SOM-Martinotti-like interneurons originating in the dorsal MGE.

The aim of this review is, firstly, to provide a comprehensive view of the morphological, molecular and electrophysiological features defining this cell type.

--> So the definition goes whey beyond of expressing calretinin. Misnomer?

They are also diverse at the molecular level as they express numerous neuropeptides in different combinations.

Unlike glutamatergic neurons which are born in the ventricu- lar zone of the telencephalic vesicle and then migrate radially (Molyneaux et al., 2007; Rakic, 2007), most of the GABAergic interneurons derive from one proliferative region called gan- glionic eminence (GE) located in the ventral part of the telencephalon.

--> Species-neutral affirmation. Very ambiguous.

(Ascoli et al., 2008). However, we feel that for the appreciation of the full diversity of observable somatodendritic configurations, this terminology has to be extended and refined in the future. In the following, we will elaborate on what we originally proposed for VIP+ neurons in the rat barrel cortex (Bayraktar et al., 2000).

This classification is strictly focused on the origin of the primary dendrites at the soma (Figure 3).

FIGURE 4 | Single cell RT-PCR analysis of a rat CR+ interneuron. (A) Current-clamp recording obtained in response to a depolarizing current pulse (300 pA). Note the initial burst followed by irregularly discharged action potentials. (B) Single-cell RT-PCR analysis of the same neuron revealing co-expression of CR, VIP, ChAT, GAD65, and GAD67. (C)

--> Nice! A good example of analysis of a particular neuron.

CR+ bipolar interneurons, summarizing the available -mostly indirect evidence coming from studies on VIP Cre interneurons that are likely to co-express CR- one can state that probably the bipolar neurons are amongst the most complex cells in the cerebral cortex because they seem to be involved in every major mechanism that has to be active to support successful neuronal computation.

With all this new information in mind, we think it is safe to
conclude that cortical inhibitory bipolar interneurons are not that enigmatic anymore as they appeared roughly 25 years ago.

# Comments
Very beautiful figure 2. 

Seems a bit confusing: Way too many slightly different ways of talking about what (they consider in the end) the same class: cortical inhibitory bipolar interneurons.
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q33796214)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q33796214)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q33796214/P921%3BP4510)  
