
An estimation of the number of cells in the human body.
=======================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34037445]  

# Highlights

In particular, the reported total cell number of a human being ranges between 1012 and 1016 and it is widely mentioned without a proper reference. Aim: To study and discuss the theoretical issue of the total number of cells that compose the standard human adult organism. Subjects and methods: A systematic calculation of the total cell number of the whole human body and of the single organs was carried out using bibliographical and/or mathematical approaches.

Since Schleiden’s and Schwann’s first formulations of cell theory (Mazzarello, 1999), it has been known that all living organisms are made of individual and identifiable cells.

Cell number, on the other hand, appears to be under strict genetic and developmental control in lower organisms: for example, bacteria and yeasts are composed of single cells, while the adult Caenorhabditis elegans worm consists of exactly 959 (male) or 1031 (ermaphrodite) somatic cells

The aim of this work is to discuss the theoretical issue of the total number of cells that compose the standard human adult organism. First, we noticed that these data were typically mentioned in the literature without citing a reference; second, we observed wide ranges among data reported by different sources, ranging from 1012–1020.

Since the cell number and cell size of various organs or systems, as well as the size of the organ or system itself, may vary according to several parameters such as age, sex, weight, pathology or evolutionary adaptations, we searched for a single reference for the ‘‘average man’’ or ‘‘standard human being’’. Since this does not exist, for the purposes of this work we chose a 30-year old young adult, weighing 70 kg, 1.72m tall and with a body area of 1.85m2 (Irving, 2007).

Therefore, since the mean weight of a mammalian cell has been estimated to be 1 ng (Makarieva et al., 2008), for a standard body weight of 70 kg (Irving, 2007), there would be 7 x 10 to the 13 cells.

The results of our bibliographical research show considerable variation in terms of order of magnitude, which is not justifiable by inter- individual differences (see Appendix A, Table A1). Furthermore, we noted a consistent lack of citations of the original literature providing the pertinent data in printed books, online available books and websites. 

From an evolutionary point of view, data about cell number in different species could allow a measure of organism and organ complexity valuable in order to classify and understand inter-species variability at phenotypic level (Herculano-Houzel, 2011; Kothari et al., 1978). The formal description of cell types and number of different organisms could be valuable, in conjunction with other measures of complexity such as gene number and function.


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34037445)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34037445)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34037445/P921%3BP4510)  
