
Forcing cells to change lineages.
=================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34020397]  

# Highlights

Lineage reprogramming has become a powerful tool to study cell fate choice during differentiation, akin to inducing mutations for the discovery of gene functions. The lessons learnt provide a rubric for how cells may be manipulated for therapeutic purposes.

Experiments performed several
decades ago showed that dormant gene expression programs can be dominantly awakened in differentiated cells by the fusion of different pairs of cell types

--> Fusion of cells of different types

The facility with which cell fates can be altered experimentally raises
the question as to whether such interconversions occur physiologically or in the context of disease. Arguably, gastrulation provides a first example oftransdetermination, where an invaginationofthe ectoderm produces mesoderm.

it was shown that mechanical shear stress enhances the formation of blood cells by inducing the formation of CD41, c-Kit-positive cells that produce increased levels of nitric oxide (NO) and upregulate Runx1 and Myb16
. Similar observations
were also made in zebrafish, demonstrating the need for blood flow and NO production for haematopoietic stem cell formation17

--> Ambiguous regarding scope...

More recently it was shown that even fully differentiated cells can be switched: C/EBPa, a transcription factor required for the formation of granulocyte-macrophage precursors22 can convert committed B- and T-cell progenitors into functional macrophages at frequencies approaching 100%23,24

So far cross-antagonistic switches were presented as relatively simple circuits functioning in a broadly cell-intrinsic manner. In reality, most antagonistic circuits in metazoa are subject to graded external inputs4

Extrapolating from Waddington, different cell types may be seen as stable solutions of transcription factor networks—or ‘attractors’—which occupy the basins of Waddington’s landscape 49–51

These views square well with experiments indicating that multi- potential cells prime competing lineage-affiliated gene expression programs before commitment—a phenomenon dubbed ‘lineage priming.

Although the combination of cross-antagonistic and autoregulatory circuits can in principle con- vert small initial asymmetries within cells into stable or metastable network states representing distinct cell types58–60, the particular cross-antagonistic circuit used to select choice may still be amenable to resetting in the other direction

Within the landscape/attractor-based conceptual framework, it is easy to see how cell fate transitions, such as those exhibited by lineage reprogramming events, may be favoured between cell types closely connected through shared regulatory switches. It also predicts that the efficiency by which transcription factors induce lineage conversions depends on the proximity of the cell type in question and that bridging greater distances may require additional factors acting at earlier common branch points

Transcription factor cross-antagonisms in a cascading landscape of unstable and stable cell states. The territory, represented as a mountain range, depicts all possible solutions ofa single regulatory network that specifies cell identity. Robust network states correspond to stably differentiated cell types (deep basins in the low-lying plains) whereas unstable solutions correspond to ridges and slopes in the landscape.

This suggests that PRDM16 controls a bidirectional fate switch between skeletal myoblasts and brown fat cells. Other examples include the conversion of astrocytes into neurons70
; neural precursors into oligodendrocytes by Ascl1 (ref. 71); neural precursors into inner ear sensory cells by Atoh1 (ref. 72); liver cells into islet b-cells by Pdx1- VP16 (ref. 73); and hepatocyte precursors into insulin producing islet-like b-cells by Ngn3 (ref. 65). Of

The question then arises whether, given enough knowledge, it will be possible to directly reprogram any cell type into another and to custom-design cells for regenerative therapy from easily obtainable cell sources. Consider B cells for example: we know that transcription factor gain or loss of function can convert these cells into macro- phages as well as into T cells and ES cells. But can B cells be induced directly to become, say, haematopoietic stem cells or islet b-cells at high frequencies, effecting ‘long jumps’ within the landscape of Fig. 5?

In conclusion, it may eventually be possible to generate cells ‘a la
carte’ by forced transcription factor expression in cultured biopsies. However, because most progenitors and differentiated cells do not proliferate, the cells generated probably cannot be expanded, as is possible with iPS cells. For cell replacement therapy purposes it is therefore crucial that high frequency transitions can be achieved. This


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34020397)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34020397)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34020397/P921%3BP4510)  
