
Using ontologies to study cell transitions
==========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34026802]  

# Highlights

Scientific understanding of the complex molecular mechanisms underlying cell transitions could be improved by making essential pieces of knowledge available in a formal (and thus computable) manner.

We describe the outline of two ontologies for cell phenotypes and for cellular mechanisms which together enable the representation of data curated from the literature or obtained by bioinformatics analyses and thus for building a knowledge base on mechanisms involved in cellular reprogramming

A cell phenotype (or cell type) can be defined by the cell’s repertoire of molecules and structural components at a certain time, together with the specific morphology and function they bring with them. A cell transition is a change in a cell that re- sults in a new phenotype.

--> Wow, cell phenotype in this context means the same as cell state and connected to the term "cell type".

Potency can be defined as the disposition of a cell to transition into another cell phenotype;

However, many efforts in formal modelling of biological phenomena of organisms focus on anatomical features and only rarely address the cell level.

Phenotypes are usually de- scribed by means of the entity-quality syntax (EQ) using thePhenotypicQualityOntologyPATOfor anatomic phenotypes [13,14]. To apply the EQ syntax to the cell level, we outlined two ontologies, an ontology of cell parts  (Figure 1) and an ontology of microscale mechanisms (Figure 2) to be used in combination with a small set of standardized modifiers (as ‘qualities’).

Most of the classes that are needed for the ontology of
cell parts can be found in CELDA.

Figure 1 Outline The figure shows a structure by which cell phenotypes, here for epithelial cells, mesenchymal cells and embryonic stem cells (ESC), can be formally represented, using entity terms (shown on the left hand side) and PATO-analogous quality modifiers (shown on the right hand side)

x, i.e. “Tight junction has_part Occludin” means: For all instances x of the type Tight junction there is some y that is an instance of the type Occludin such that x has part y.

To describe cell phenotypes and transitions, we refer
to entities belonging to distinct ontological top-level categories [17]:
(1)Independent continuants: Cells and their organelles as well as molecules are three-dimensional entities; they are present with all their spatial parts at every time of their existence.
(2)Dependent continuants: Any property of a cell or a molecule, be it a quality or a disposition, also exists as a whole at every time of its existence. However, any such property is ontologically dependent on its particular bearer: It cannot exist without it.
(3)Occurrents: Interactions, inhibitions, stimulations as well as transitions are temporally extended processes. They have temporal parts that occur at different times; hence they do not exist as a whole at any single point of time

Our ontologies are designed to be used together with specific modifiers within the EQ framework.

The ontologies outlined above enable similarity searches across cell phenotypes and mechanism changes in ana- logy to [12]. In particular, we wish to estimate the simi- larity of cell types and of cell transitions across time.

Our ontology of cell mechanisms enables to infer (by subsumption reasoning, following the idea of [12]) the magenta tick marks. Our example sug- gests that similarity estimates after ontology-based reason- ing are better and more reliable than without reasoning.


While our individuation criteria for cell phenotype are very fine-grained (even a tiny change in the molecular repertoire constitutes a change in phenotype), we can construct more coarse-grained cell types by clustering of cell phenotypes based on similarity, considering the pres- ence or absence of morphological or (ultra-)structural components and of molecular entities.

We outlined how to design ontologies that enable to (1) formally represent cell phenotypes and mechanism changes behind cell transitions such as (re-)programming, and to (2) develop algorithms exploiting this framework, includ- ing clustering and searching for similar cell phenotypes and mechanism changes.

To avoid a garbage-in, garbage-out scenario, the application domain must be strictly limited, e.g. to data describing reprogramming and EMT experiments, so that the input data can all be validated by domain experts. Ultimately we envision a community-based crowd-sourcing approach.

--> Yes!! Explicitly claiming for crowd-sourcing.

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34026802)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34026802)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34026802/P921%3BP4510)  
