
Cross-product extensions of the Gene Ontology.
==============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34020884]  
  
Publication date : 10 of February, 2010  

# Highlights

 Reasoners can be used to assist with ontology development, automaticallyplacing classes in a subsumption hierarchy based on their properties. However, the historic lack of com-putable definitions within the GO has prevented the user of these tools

 In this paper, we present preliminary results of an ongoing effort to normalize the GO by explicitlystating the definitions of compositional classes in a form that can be used by reasoners. These definitionsare partitioned into mutually exclusive cross-product sets, many of which reference other OBO Foundrycandidate ontologies for chemical entities, proteins, biological qualities and anatomical entities

 --> Looks like Rector normalization.

 The OBO Foundry[5]was initiated in part to provide a means of normalizing the GO,such that for example the GO definition of ‘‘oocyte differentiation”could reference the class ‘‘oocyte” in the OBO Cell ontology (CL),and an automated reasoner tool could be used to classify this asa kind of ‘‘germ cell differentiation”, based on the CL classification.This is also an example of a ‘re-use’ pattern, common in softwareengineering

 We provide computable logical definitions for classes usinggenus-differentia constructs, of the form ‘‘an X is a G that D”.

In OWL Manchester Syntax, this is written as an equivalence ax-iom between the class mitochondrial translation and the descrip-tiontranslationandoccurs_insomemitochondrion(seeTable 1). In this particular case, theoccurs_inrelation is not definedin the RO, but we can define this using two existing relations:has_participantandlocated_in.

We use the following set of OBO Foundry candidate ontologiesfor the cross-products:BP– GO Biological ProcessCC– GO Cellular ComponentMF– GO Molecular FunctionCL– Cel

2.2. Location of processes in a cellTheBPCCcross-product set includes definitions for biologicalprocess classes that use cellular component classes as differentiae

Note that not all transport classes fall strictly into theBPCCset. Sometimes cell types are referenced, sometimes chemicalentity types – in these cases they would fall into theBPCLorBPCHEBIset.

GO covers the development and formation of structures at dif-ferent levels of organization, from subcellular components throughto whole organisms. We use the species-neutral OBO Cell ontology(CL)[9]for defining classes such as ‘‘oocyte differentiation” in theBPCLset.

One of the goals of assigning computable logical definitions is toleverage tools such as reasoners to automate tedious and error-prone aspects of ontology maintenance.

The GO does not pre-compose classes for all biologically mean-ingfulcompositionsofclasses,asthiswouldleadtoalarge,unwieldyontology. The guiding principle is to generate compositional classeswhere the differentiae are important to the biology.


The GO does not pre-compose classes for all biologically mean-ingfulcompositionsofclasses,asthiswouldleadtoalarge,unwieldyontology. The guiding principle is to generate compositional classeswhere the differentiae are important to the biology. For example,there is a strong argument for pre-composing ‘mitochondrial trans-lation’ as the mechanism of translation in the mitochondria is differ-ent than that elsewhere. This choice can be justified by theappearance of ‘mitochondrial translation’ in gene set enrichmentanalysis results. In contrast, it is unlikely GO would pre-compose‘ossificationof middlephalanxofleftlittlefinger’,as thereis nothingto distinguish this kind of ossification from other kinds of middlephalanxossificationotherthantriviallybylocation.Italsoseemsun-likely we would see a class like this show up in class-enrichmentanalyses(unlessofcoursethiswasanunlikelygeneexpressionstudyfocusing on this body part).

his work also highlights the importance and necessity of theOBO Foundry effort, particularly with respect to efforts to createsingle orthogonal well-partitioned ontologies each representing adistinct domain of biology.



# Comments

## Tags
- 1.3.1.1 Gene Ontology
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34020884)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34020884)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34020884/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q34020884&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34020884/P921%3BP4510)  
