
Mitochondrial DNA molecules and virtual number of mitochondria per cell in mammalian cells.
===========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34168557]  

# Highlights

A new biochemical method for estimating the virtual number of mitochondria
(mt) per cell was developed and used together with a plasmid probe to
measure mt DNNmitochondrion and mt DNNcell. These methods were used
in five cell types from four mammalian species. Mt DNAhnitochondrion was
essentially constant in all cell types (mean 2.6 0.30 SE mitochondria1 DNA
moleculeslmt). Mt DNA moleculeslcell encompassed an eight-fold range between various cell types (low 220 f 6.2; high 1,720 f 162 rnt DNA molecules/
cell). Virtual mt numberlcell ranged from 83 k 17 to 677 2 80 (SE) mtkell in
various cell types. All five mammalian virtual mitochondria contained the
same genomic mass. The number of virtual mitochondria per cell and amount
of mt DNA per cell appear to be closely regulated within a given cell type but
differ widely from cell type to cell type.


Another issue involves the number of mitochondria
per cell and whether this value has in vivo significance.
There are two conflicting models.
Most workers assume that individual mitochondria
have a discrete structure that can be revealed by conventional ultrastructural methods and that the number
of these discrete mitochondria per cell can be estimated
by morphometric techniques (Lehninger, 1965; Grimes
et al., 1974).

Alternate models arise from ultrastructural and in
vivo studies on yeast mitochondria and suggest that the
mitochondrion consists of a giant, branched organelle
with one giant mitochondrion per cell (Hoffman and
Avers, 1972). This model would require that conventional ultrastructural approaches result in the artifactual appearance of multiple discrete mitochondria
during tissue processing that are, in reality, fragments
of a single giant organelle. This view would mandate a
reassessment of mitochondrial biogenesis and genetics
(Hoffman and Avers, 1972)

The term “virtual mitochondrial number” is used to
deal with the possibility that in vivo there is a single
giant mitochondrion or mitochondrial network in each
cell. If mitochondria exist as individual discrete units,
then the values for mitochondrial numberkell and virtual numberhell would be identical. If’ there is a single
giant organelle per cell, the term “virtual” would refer
to the number of individual mitochondrial fragments,
each with an observed content of a specific mitochondrial constituent which would be required to result in
the observed total cellular content of that mitochondrial
constituent.

--> Nice definition

Five separate cell types derived from four mammalian cell lines were studied. 

--> Immediate extrapolation from cell lines to in-vivo cell types!

We used two index compounds, mitochondrial DNA
and cytochrome aa3, which is tightly bound to the inner
mitochondrial membranes (Racker, 1970)


A rat myoblast cell line, L-8, was originaly isolated
from rat skeletal muscle provided by Dr. H. Blau. Human lung fibroblasts, HFL, were obtained from the
American Type Culture Collection.

A mouse fibroblast cell line, LA9, was provided by Dr.
D. Clayton

Rabbit peritoneal macrophages (PM) and lung macrophages (LM) were obtained as follows. Neither type of macrophage
replicates under the conditions of preparation, nor do
macrophages isolated by this method replicate in cell
culture. 

--> The cell lines are originated from 4 different source taxons!!

Table 1 compares the results of six separate determinations of virtual mt number/cell in rat L-8 skeletal
muscle cell
--> Nice, primary data!


TABLE 1. Comparison of virtual mt numberkell in rat L-8 skeletal
muscle cells determined by the Cyaas method and by the mitochondrial DNA method'
Virtual mitochondria1 number/cell

'The substantial agreement hetween the two methods is obvious.
--> old-school footnote! super cool!

TABLE 3. Comparison of Cyaasicell directly determined on cell homogenates or calculated from the
product of Cyaa3hitochondrion and virtual mitochondrial numberhell determined by the mitochondrial
DNA method' 

--> Well the comparison for rabbit macrophages is intraspecific, at least

TABLE 5. A comparison of mt L)NA/mt, virtual mt numberkell, mt DNAicell, Cyaaglmt, and Cyaa&ell in five cell types from four mammalian soecies

Mt
DNNmt (or per mitochondrial fragment) shows almost
no variation between values in any single cell type,
between different cell types, and between cells from
various mammalian species

However, there is marked variation between
the various cell types. If these cell type differences arise
from preparation artifact, then each cell type must have
its own individual pattern of fragmentation during
preparation.

differences in the rate of biogenesis and
biodegradation of mitochondria in different cell types
(Schatz, 1968)

There are three current models of the structural unit
of the intracellular representation of mitochondria. One
model (the conventional model) views this organelle as
discrete granular units of variable shape, size, and complexity (Novikoff and Holtzman, 1976

e results using this method in five separate
mammalian cell types confirm previous impressions that
different cell types contain different numbers of mitochondria (Bogenhagen and Clayton, 1974)

. Measurements of mitochondrial DNA/
cell can now be used to measure either the number of
mitochondridcell or the mean total mitochondrial genomic mass/cell in a given cell type. A relatively trivial
application would be the use of the method to fractionate
quantitatively the distribution of cell constituents that
have both mitochondrial and extramitochondrial localizations.

# Comments

## Tags
1.4.4
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34168557)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34168557)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34168557/P921%3BP4510)  
