
Massively parallel single-cell RNA-seq for marker-free decomposition of tissues into cell types.
================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34404570]  
  
Publication date : 01 of February, 2014  

# Highlights
We introduce an automated massively parallel single-cell RNA sequencing approach for analyzing in vivo transcriptional states in thousands of single cells. Combined with unsupervised classification algorithms, this facilitates ab initio cell type characterization of splenic tissue.
Modeling single-cell transcriptional states in dendritic cells and additional hematopoietic cell types uncovers rich cell-type heterogeneity and gene-modules activity in steady-state and after pathogen activation

We developed an automated massively parallel RNA single-cell sequencing framework (MARS-Seq, figures S1 to S6 and Supplementary methods (21)) that is designed for in vivo sampling of thousands of cells by multiplexing RNA sequencing while maintaining tight control over amplification biases and labeling errors

We have implemented a probabilistic strategy for unsupervised classification of cells into “idealized types”. Hierarchical clustering (Fig. 2A) defined seeds of highly correlated cells, leading to the initialization of a probabilistic mixture model and classification of single cells into types or families of homogeneous states

nalysis of gene enrichment (Table S2, figs. S7 and S8), and comparison of these profiles with existing transcriptional profiles of classical hematopoietic populations (immgen.org), unambiguously linked class I–V to B cells, NK cells, macrophages (MF), monocytes (Mo) and pDC (Fig. 2C). The remaining classes were all linked to DC

 Nevertheless, we found strong support for significant internal organization within the remaining DC population (DC2-4, Table S5), including a group of cells co-expressing Relb, Nfkbia and additional associated genes (DC2)

 We presented a new framework for broad sampling of single-cell transcriptional states from tissues and demonstrated how it can be used to dissect complex functions in a bottom-up fashion.

 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34404570)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34404570)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34404570/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q34404570&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.1247651)  
