
Single-cell messenger RNA sequencing reveals rare intestinal cell types.
========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34490100]  

# Highlights

we first sequenced the transcriptome of hundreds of randomly selected cells from mouse intestinal organoids1 , cultured self-organizing epithelial structures that contain all cell lineages of the mammalian intestine. Organoid buds,
like intestinal crypts, harbour stem cells that continuously differentiate into a variety of cell types, occurring at widely different
abundances2 . Since available computational methods can only
resolve more abundant cell types, we developed RaceID, an algorithm for rare cell type identification in complex populations of single cells

We use this algorithm to identify Reg4 as a
novel marker for enteroendocrine cells, a rare population of hormone-producing intestinal cells

Cluster 3 comprises distinct cells with non-overlapping
expression of marker genes for diverse secretory cell types, such as
the enteroendocrine marker Chga, the goblet cell marker Muc2, or
the Paneth cell marker Lyz1

To detect rare cell types, we screened for outliers that could not be
explained by a background model accounting for technical and biological gene expression noise (see Methods, Fig. 2a and Extended Data
Fig. 4). Distinct outliers were grouped into 10 novel clusters based on
transcriptome correlation (see Methods, Fig. 2b). Differential gene
expression analysis revealed the presence of rare cell types among these
clusters, comprising goblet, tuft, Paneth and enteroendocrine cells

In summary, we demonstrated here the ability of RaceID to correctly
classify different cell types in a complex mixture and reveal heterogeneity among rare cells. We believe that single-cell mRNA sequencing in
combination with the RaceID algorithm is a powerful tool to unravel
heterogeneity of rare cell types in both healthy and diseased organs.

--> By "identify cell type" they actually mean "detect cell cluster"
# Comments

## Tags
1.4.2.2.1


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34490100)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34490100)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34490100/P921%3BP4510)  
