
A promoter-level mammalian expression atlas
===========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34412203]  
  
Publication date : 01 of March, 2014  

# Highlights

The functional annotation of the mammalian genome 5 (FANTOM5) project provides comprehensive expression profiles and functional annotation of mammalian cell-type-specific transcriptomes with wide
applications in biomedical research.

--> 1.4.4

Identities of cell types are determined by transcriptional cascades that
start initially in the fertilised egg. In each cell lineage, specific sets of
transcription factors are induced or repressed. These factors together
provide proximal and distal regulatory inputs that are integrated at transcription start sites (TSSs) to control the transcription of target genes.
Most genes have more than one TSS, and the regulatory inputs that
determine TSS choice and activity are diverse and complex (reviewed
in ref. 2)

. a, Samples profiled in FANTOM5. b, Reproducible cell-type-specific CAGE patterns
observed for the 266 base CpG island associated B4GALT1 locus transcription
initiation region hg19:chr9:33167138..33167403. CAGE profiles for CD41 T
cells (blue), CD141 monocytes (gold), aortic smooth muscle cells (green) and
the adrenal cortex adenocarcinoma cell line SW-13 (red) are shown

. To facilitate data mining all samples were annotated using structured ontologies (Cell Ontology7
, Uberon8, Disease Ontology9)

--> 1.3.1

975 human and 399 mouse samples, including primary cells, tissues
and cancer cell lines, using single-molecule sequencing3 (Fig. 1; see the
full sample list in Supplementary Table 1).


In addition many of the 1,225 known genes
that were missed in the collection are known to be specifically expressed
in cell types that are not easily procured; indicating that even more of
the mammalian transcriptome has a cell-type-restricted expression

Figure 2 | Cell-type-restricted and housekeeping transcripts encoded in the
mammalian genome.
--> 1.4.4

Figure 3 | TSS conservation as a function of expression properties and
functional annotation. 

b, Same axes as panel a showing TSSs with expression that is biased towards a single
expression facet (larger mutually exclusive grouping of the primary cell and
tissue samples based on the sample ontologies CO and UBERON, defined in
ref. 4). Only expression facets with greater than 250 enriched TSSs are shown.
For clarity, only a subset of expression facets are coloured and labelled.

Macaque
(rheMac3)

Dog
(canFam3)

Mouse
(mm9)

--> Also jump from stricto sensu to archetype. Complex, but kind of cool.

Clustering transcription factors by expression profile revealed sets
of transcription factors specifically enriched in each cell type

Figure 4 | Coexpression clustering of human promoters in FANTOM5.
Collapsed coexpression network derived from 4,882 coexpression groups
(one node is one group of promoters; 4,664 groups are shown here) derived
from expression profiles of 124,090 promoters across all primary cell types,
tissues and cell line


Focusing on these key regulators and
motif searching in the corresponding cell-type-specific promoters provides the data to build cell-type-specific regulatory network models
and support a rational approach to identification of drivers required to
reprogram cells from one lineage to another


# Comments
Lots of cell types are mentioned, good for Wikidata.

Table S1 has marker information and many cell types! Could be a good extra dataset for 3.1.2 .
I could not find CL ID, though. 



## Tags
1.4.1

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34412203)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34412203)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34412203/P921%3BP4510)  
