
Microparadigms: chains of collective reasoning in publications about molecular interactions.
============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34451887]  
  
Publication date : 16 of March, 2006  

# Highlights

We analyzed a very large set of molecular interactions that had
been derived automatically from biological texts. We found that
published statements, regardless of their verity, tend to interfere
with interpretation of the subsequent experiments and, therefore,
can act as scientific ‘‘microparadigms,’’ similar to dominant scientific theories [Kuhn, T. S. (1996) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Univ. Chicago Press, Chicago)].

Our results indicate that, when
building biological models based on published experimental data,
we may have to treat the data as highly dependent-ordered
sequences of statements (i.e., chains of collective reasoning) rather
than unordered and independent experimental observations.

We explicitly modeled
both the generation of experimental results and the experimenters’
interpretation of their results and found that previously published
statements, regardless of whether they are subsequently shown to be
true or false, can have a profound effect on interpretations of
further experiments and the probability that a scientific community
would converge to a correct conclusion.

Our first observation, based on computation, was that, because
of the huge data set, we can clearly demonstrate that momentums
of published statements are notably positive, but 0.1 (see Fig. 4 A
and B). This result means that scientists are often strongly affected
by prior publications in interpreting their own experimental data,
while weighting their own private results (which have weight 1 under
our model) at least 10-fold as high as a single result published by
somebody else.


# Comments

## Tags
1.1. The quest for interoperable knowledge


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34451887)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34451887)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34451887/P921%3BP4510)  
