
The quantified cell
===================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34504200]  

# Highlights

e are
prone to thinking by analogy—Golgi cisternae stack like pancakes, red blood cells look like
donuts—but very little in our human experience is truly comparable to the immensely crowded, membrane-subdivided interior of a eukaryotic cell or the intricately layered structures of
a mammalian tissue. So in our daily efforts to understand how cells work, we are faced with
a challenge: how do we develop intuition that works at the microscopic scale?


I have deeply regretted that I did not proceed far enough at
least to understand something of the great leading principles
of mathematics, for men thus endowed seem to have an extra
sense.
—Charles Darwin, Autobiography

Applying this quantitative approach to biology is inherently difficult because life is dynamic and diverse. For example, when we ask
our fellow biologists how many copies of their favorite protein are
found in a particular cell line, they often answer that “it depends.”

Finally, you might tell us that a car costs about
$10,000. This number is not so accurate—a cheap car might be
$8000 and a more expensive one $40,000—but it is a very useful estimate. We would probably have a similar discussion about the cost of
a TV, only scaled down by an order of magnitude

Which is heavier, a protein or the mRNA that codes for it?
Even after years of studying and manipulating DNA, RNA, and protein in our labs, we may not be prepared for this question

mRNA has a mass about ninefold greater than the protein it encodes (without even accounting for the mass of untranslated regionsof mRNA)


 A typical goldfish keratocyte
cell volume is ≈500 μm3 (BNID 110905) and thus requires 500 μm3 ×
109 aa/μm3 × 4 ATP/aa ≈ 2 × 1012 ATP just to synthesize its proteins
from amino acids. Taking the average half-life of a protein to be
about 1 day (Cambridge et al., 2011), we find that the cell must
duplicate its proteome once every 24 h ≈ 105 s, thereby consuming
≈2 × 107 ATP/s—almost 100-fold more than we estimated is required for motility

--> 1.4.4

. Having made
the effort to calculate the energetic cost of eukaryotic motility, we
have refined our understanding of the energy budget of cells. We
are also left with a number of motivating unanswered questions.
Why do our physiological and cellular estimates of ATP production
differ by more than an order of magnitude? Perhaps human foreskin
fibroblasts are much more metabolically active than other motile
cells (Katsu-Kimura et al., 2009)?

We note that these questions arise because of the calculation
we performed and are sharper and more lucid because they are
phrased quantitatively. 

Similarly, you
might wonder whether actin dynamics require a larger fraction of
cellular energy in other types of cells, which may use actin for intracellular transport or cell division rather than motility (Bray, 2014). 

A collection of our favorite backof-the-envelope calculations is available as Cell Biology by the
Numbers (book.bionumbers.org)—we would love to add yours.

--> Very cool book
# Comments
1.4.4

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34504200)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34504200)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34504200/P921%3BP4510)  
