
Are We Really Vastly Outnumbered? Revisiting the Ratio of Bacterial to Host Cells in Humans.
============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34511374]  

# Highlights

It is often presented as common knowledge that, in the human body, bacteria outnumber human
cells by a ratio of at least 10:1. Revisiting the question, we find that the ratio is much closer to 1:1.

Both the numerator (number of microbial cells) and the denominator (human
cells) of this 10:1 ratio are based on crude
assessments. Most sources cite the number of human cells as 1013 or 1014, and a
recent study reported 3.7 3 1013 human
cells in a ‘‘reference’’ human (Bianconi et al., 2013).

In the literature, we find many statements
for the number of cells in the human body
ranging from 1012 to 1014 cells

A detailed analysis of this
sort was recently published (Bianconi
et al., 2013). The number of cells in the
body by type or organ system was estimated. Since the aim was to systematically scrutinize all cellular components,
the authors alternate between grouping
by histologic type (e.g., glial cells) or by
locus/organ where both parenchymal
and stromal cells are accounted for (e.g.,
‘‘bone marrow nucleated cells’’), totaling
56 cell type categories. We revisited and
updated the values for all the main contributors to total cell number to find
3.0 3 1013 human cells in the 70 kg ‘‘reference man’’ with 2% uncertainty and 14%
CV (Sender et al., 2016).

After revising both the numerator and
denominator in the ratio of bacteria to
human cells in the body, we arrive at our
updated estimate of B/H = 1.3, with an uncertainty of 25% and a variation of 53%
over the population of standard 70 kg
males


# Comments

## Tags
1.1.1 (hidden problems, not only hidden knowledge)
2.3

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34511374)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34511374)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34511374/P921%3BP4510)  
