
Revised Estimates for the Number of Human and Bacteria Cells in the Body
========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34537872]  

# Highlights

We estimate the total number of bacteria in the 70 kg "reference man" to be 3.81013.
For human cells, we identify the dominant role of the hematopoietic lineage to the total
count (90%) and revise past estimates to 3.01013 human cells

 Here, we provide an account of
the methodologies employed hitherto for cell count and revise past estimates. Doing so, we
repeat and reflect on the assumptions in previous back-of-the-envelope calculations, also
known as Fermi problems. We find such estimates as effective sanity checks and a way to
improve our quantitative understanding in biology

As we showed recently [4], all papers regarding the number of bacteria in the human gastrointestinal tract that gave reference to the value stated could be traced to a single back-of-theenvelope estimate [3].


 As discussed in Box 1, we integrated data sources on the volume of the colon to arrive
at 0.4 L.

Given the water content of bacteria, the total dry
weight of bacteria in the body is about 50–100g. This value is consistent with a parallel alternative estimate for the total mass of bacteria that multiplies the average mass of a gut bacterium
of about 5 pg (wet weight, corresponding to a dry weight of 1–2 pg, see S1 Appendix) with the
updated total number of bacteria. We note that this empirically observed average gut bacterium
is several times bigger than the conveniently chosen “standard” 1 μm3 volume and 1 pg wet
mass bacterium often referred to in textbooks.


The total bacteria mass we find represents about 0.3% of the overall body weight, significantly updating previous statements that 1%–3% of the body mass is composed of bacteria or that a normal human hosts 1–3 kg of bacteria [25].


In our effort to revisit the measurements cited, we employed an approach that tries to combine
the detailed, census approach with the benefits of a heuristic calculation used as a sanity check.
We focused on the six cell types that were recently identified [1] to comprise 97% of the human
cell count: red blood cells (accounting for 70%), glial cells (8%), endothelial cells (7%), dermal
fibroblasts (5%), platelets (4%), and bone marrow cells (2%). The other 50 cell types account
for the remaining 3%. In four cases (red blood cells, glial cells, endothelial cells, and dermal
fibroblasts), we arrived at revised calculations as detailed in Box 4

 We find that the body includes only 31012 non-blood human cells, merely 10% of the total updated human cell
count. The visualization in Fig 2 highlights that almost 90% of the cells are estimated to be enucleated cells (261012 cells), mostly red blood cells and platelets, while the other 10% consist
of 31012 nucleated cells.

It is prudent in making such estimates to approach the analysis from different angles. In that
spirit, we now ask does the cumulative mass of the cells counted fall within the expected range
for a reference adult? To properly tackle that question, we first need to state what the anticipated result is, i.e., total body cell mass. For a reference man mass of 70 kg, 25% is extracellular
fluid [37], another 7% is extracellular solids [37], thus we need to account for 46 kg of cell
mass (including fat).

A comprehensive systematic source for the composition of total cell mass (rather than total cell
count) is the Report of the Task Group on Reference Man [6], which gives values for the mass of
the main tissues of the human body. This mass per tissue analysis includes both intra- and extracellular components. To distinguish between intra- and extracellular portions of each tissue, we can
leverage total body potassium measurements [38] 


The issue of whether cells without a nucleus should be included or discarded in the calculation of the number of human cells, and thus the B/H ratio, seems to be a question of definition. We view red blood cells as bona fide cells, as their name suggests. But it is also plausible to choose not to include them as some may think of them
as “bags full of hemoglobin.” Inclusion of platelets in the count, which corresponds to their inclusion in previous counts, is also potentially disputable but has only a minor quantitative effect.
Indeed, this opens an interesting tangential discussion on what should be defined as a cell.


We note in passing that the number of endosymbiotic bacteria that we harbor in the form of
mitochondria probably outnumbers the body bacteria several fold. This can be appreciated by
noting that most cell types (though not red blood cells) contain hundreds (or more) of mitochondria per cell [48].

Finally, the type of numeric focus exercised here reveals and attracts attention to knowledge gaps such as
the bacterial population densities in the proximal colon and how well are they represented by current analysis methods. We thus became aware through this study of promising steps forward in fulfilling the Delphic maxim of ‘‘know thyself” from a quantitative perspective.

# Comments

Good abundance measures.

Nice figures too.

## Tags

1.4.4

2.3

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34537872)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34537872)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34537872/P921%3BP4510)  
