ion
An atlas of active enhancers across human cell types and tissues.
=================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34660689]  
  
Publication date : 01 of March, 2014  

# Highlights

g cap analysis of gene expression5 (CAGE),

Enhancers control the correct temporal and cell-type-specific activation of gene expression in multicellular eukaryotes.
Knowing their properties, regulatory activity and targets is crucial to understand the regulation of differentiation and
homeostasis. Here we use the FANTOM5 panel of samples, covering themajority of human tissues and cell types, to produce
an atlas of active, in vivo-transcribed enhancers


promoterdistal regulatory regions like enhancers are essential in the control ofcell-type specificity1

Based upon the FANTOM5CAGE expression atlas encompassing 432 primary cell, 135 tissue and 241 cell line
samples from human6 , we identify 43,011 enhancer candidates and characterize their activity across the majority of human cell types and tissues

--> Do they mean 432 cell types?? I think so.

bidirectional capped RNAs is a signature
feature of active enhancers. On this basis, we identified 43,011 enhancer candidates across 808 human CAGE libraries


Figure 3 | CAGE expression identifies cell-type-specific enhancer usage.
a, Relationship between CAGE and histone modifications in blood cells. Rows
represent CAGE-defined enhancers that are ordered based on hierarchical
clustering of CAGE expression b, Mean signal of
DNase-seq as well as ChIP-seq for H3K27ac and H3K4me1 (vertical axes) per
cell type (rows) in 6 1kb regions (horizontal axes) around enhancer midpoints,
for enhancers with blood-cell type-specific CAGE expression (columns).

--> I wonder if they are all marker-defined cell types. 

The majority of selected
cell-type-specific enhancers could be validated in corresponding cell
lines and were associated with cell-type-specific DNA demethylation

grouped the primary cell and tissue samples into larger, mutually exclusive cell type and organ/tissue groups (referred to as facets),
respectively, with similar function or morphology (Supplementary
Tables 10 and 11).


Noteworthy exceptions include blood and immune
cells, testis, thymus and spleen, which have high enhancer/gene ratios.
Conversely, smooth and skeletal muscle and skin, bone and epitheliarelated cells have low ratios

--> 1.4.4

A major challenge is to link enhancers to their target genes21,22.


Figure 4 | In vivo validation in zebrafish of tissue-specific enhancers.
Validations of in vivo activity of CAGE-defined human enhancers CRE1, CRE2
and CRE3 in zebrafish embryos at long-pec stage. Each panel shows,from left to
right, representative yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) and bright field images of
embryos injected with the human enhancer gata2 promoter reporter gene
construct (left), YFP zoom-ins (middle) and CAGE expression in TPM in
human tissues/cell types for the enhancer (right). Muscle (mu) and yolk
syncytial layer (ysl) activities are background expression coming from the gata2
promoter-containing reporter construct. All images are lateral, head to the left.
Note the correspondence between zebrafish and human enhancer usage/
expression. Supplementary Fig. 20 shows UCSC browser images of each
selected enhancer

--> Cool stricto sensu to archetype leap!


Purification of blood cell types. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were isolated from leukapheresis products of healthy volunteers by density gradient centrifugation over Ficoll/Hypaque (Biochrom AG). Collection of blood cells from
healthy donors was performed in compliance with the Helsinki Declaration. All
donors signed an informed consent. The leukapheresis procedure and subsequent
purification of peripheral blood cells was approved by the local ethical committee
(reference number 92-1782 and 09/066c). CD41 cells were enriched using magnetically labelled human CD4 MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec) and the Midi-MACS
system (Miltenyi Biotec). The CD41 fraction was stained with CD4 FITC (fluorescein isothiocyanate; Becton Dickinson, catalogue no. 345768), CD25 phycoerythrin (PE; Becton Dickinson, catalogue no. 341011) and CD45RA allophycocyanin
(APC) and CD31CD41CD252 T cells were sorted on a FACS-Aria high-speed
cell sorter (BD Biosciences). CD81 cells were enriched using magnetically labelled
human CD8 MicroBeads (Miltenyi). The CD81 fraction was stained with CD3
FITC (Becton Dickinson, catalogue no 345763) and CD8 APC (Becton Dickinson,
catalogue no. 345775) and sorted for CD31CD81 T cells. CD191 and CD561
cells were enriched from the CD82 fraction using magnetically labelled human
CD19 and CD56 MicroBeads (Miltenyi). Enriched cells were stained with CD3
FITC (Becton Dickinson, catalogue no. 345763), CD19 PE (Becton Dickinson,
catalogue no. 345777) and CD56 APC (Becton Dickinson, catalogue no. 341027)
and sorted into CD31CD191 B cells and CD31CD561 natural killer (NK) cells.
Purification of blood monocytes is described elsewhere52

--> Yep, marker based all the way.

# Comments

## Tags
1.4.1
1.4.4
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34660689)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34660689)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34660689/P921%3BP4510)  
