
Single-cell transcriptomics reveals receptor transformations during olfactory neurogenesis.
===========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34674303]  
  
Publication date : 05 of November, 2015  

# Highlights

We used single neuron RNA-Sequencing (RNA-Seq) to explore developmental mechanisms that shape this ability as nasal olfactory neurons mature in mice. Most mature neurons expressed only one of the roughly 1000 odorant receptor genes (Olfrs) available, and that at high levels.

 A single immature neuron could express Olfrs from up to seven different chromosomes. The mature state in which expression of Olfr genes is restricted to one per neuron emerges over a developmental progression that appears independent of neuronal activity requiring sensory transduction molecules.


In  mice,  approximately  1000  odorant  receptor genes (Olfrs) and 350 pseudogenes reside at dozens of  distinct  loci  on  17/21  chromosomes  (3–5)

he markers used were: Progenitor, Ascl1 (achaete-scute complex homolog  1);  Precursor,  Neurog1 (neurogenin  1)  and/or  Neurod1 (neurogenic    differentiation    1);    Immature  OSN,  Gap43  (growth associated   protein   43)   and/or   Gng8  (guanine  nucleotide  bind-ing  protein  gamma  8);  Mature  OSN, Omp(olfactory    marker    protein)  and  four  olfactory  sensory  transduction  molecules  downstream of odorant receptors: Gnal (guanine nucleotide binding  protein,  alpha  stimulating,  olfactory  type),  Adcy3(adenylate  cyclase  3),  Cnga2  (cyclic  nucleotide  gated  chan-nel  alpha  2),  and  Cnga4(cyclic  nucleotide  gated  channel  alpha 4) (18, 19). 

Olfr  expression  first  appeared  at  the  late  precursor  to  early  immature  OSN  stage  (Fig.  2).

In  mature  OSNs,  Olfr  and Omp  transcripts  averaged  8169  and  10,167  FPKM  per  cell,  respectively.  However,  6/12  early immature OSNs that expressed >1 Olfr did not express Omp(Fig.  2D),

These  results  confirm  that  single  OSNs can express more than one Olfr and suggest that Olfr coexpression  occurs  predominantly,  if  not  exclusively,  in  immature OSNs.

How  does  the  developing  OSN  transition  from  express-ing low levels of multiple Olfrs to expressing a high level of a single Olfr? One possibility is a “winner-takes-all”  mecha-nism.  In  this  model,  multiple  Olfrs  are  initially  expressed,  but  one  becomes  dominant,  for  example  by  the  capture  of  limiting  factors  required  for  high  level  Olfr expression  (Fig.  S5).  In  a  second  model,  selection  of  a  single  Olfr  for  high  level expression would occur independently of those initially expressed.


Fig.   4.Immature  neurons  coexpress  Olfrsfrom  multiple   chromosomal   loci.Diagrams   show   the   chromosomal locations of Olfrs expressed in single OSNs of different stages.

--> cool


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34674303)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34674303)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34674303/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q34674303&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.AAD2456)  
