
Manual curation is not sufficient for annotation of genomic databases
=====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34655326]  
  
Publication date : 01 of July, 2007  

# Highlights

hisarticle proposes the application of a metric from software engineer-ing known as thefound/fixed graphto the problem of evaluating theprocesses by which genomic knowledge bases are built, as well asthe completeness of their contents

The quality of thecontents(as opposed to the quality of theprocessof knowledgebase construction) is a separate issue, and we do not address itexperimentally in this paper; see Section 5.2 for a discussion ofpotential future work on this problem. 

The metricis based on tracking both cumulative counts of unique bugsthat have been discovered (‘found’ bugs or ‘open’ bug reports)and resolved (‘fixed’ bugs or ‘closed’ bug reports) over time.The shape of the resulting curves can be used to assess theengineering process, since good and bad processes, or softwareproducts that are and are not ready for release, have differentcharacteristic curves (Fig. 1).

Although it was originally conceived for evaluating softwaredevelopment processes, we propose that the metric can beapplied to the evaluation of knowledge base constructionprocesses and knowledge base completeness, as well. We do thisby changing what is reflected on they-axis. In the examples thatfollow, we use they-axis to chart Swiss-Prot entries that lackfunctioncomment annotations and GO concept assignments,and Entrez Gene entries that lack GeneRIFs.


igure 2, which graphs Swiss-Prot annotation ofDrosophilaproteins with Gene Ontology concepts. Few new unannotatedgenes are being added, and the majority of the previouslyunannotated ones have been addressed.

We can observe a more extreme version of thispattern in Figure 3, which graphs Swiss-Prot annotation ofmouse proteins with Gene Ontology concepts. Missing datapoints are continually being addressed, as can be observed bythe constant climb in the ‘fixed’ line. However, unannotatedproteins are continually being added, as can be observed by theclimb in the ‘found’ line. There is no reason to expect that thisproject will be ‘bug’-free any time soon

One anonymousreviewer  pointed  out  a  prototype  wiki  for  proteins(WikiProteins6, Gileset al., 2007). We do not have data onthe development processes of the collaborative annotationefforts. However, we note that the GeneRIF collection atNCBI  allows  community  contribution  of  GeneRIFs  inaddition to the normal manual production process, and yetas Table 1 shows, this important data type may continue tobe  unavailable  for  all  (human  and  mouse)  genes  fordecades, despite the fact that its rate of growth is quiteimpressive (Luet al., 2007, p. 272). So, at least for this example,it seems to be the case that collaborative curation does notsolve the problem.

--> Yep, but it is really a constrained setting, and the "problem" is relatively artificial. Collab curation is what makes it possible to have corpi for automatic curation.

Even with the simplifying assumptions and the relatively weakproxies in the current work, the found/fixed metricstillrevealsimportant facts about the knowledge bases that we haveexamined. For example, even if we make the assumption thatEntrez Gene already contains entries for every human andmouse gene, we can predict from the rate of rise of the ‘found’lines in Figures 6 and 7 that if we continue the current rate offunding for NCBI annotation work (and do not either increasethe number of NCBI annotators drastically or fund thedevelopment of automated methods to assist in the curationprocess), we will not have GeneRIFs for every human geneuntil 2020 (13 years from now)

--> And now, a year ago! So, not that much, huh?

. Thealternatives are to find massive additional funds for manualcuration, rely on the collaborative efforts of the biologicalcommunity, or to develop technologies for text mining andother forms of automated curator assistance. Burkhardtet al.(2006) and others have suggested that manual curation willalways be necessary; the current approaches to doing it areclearly not keeping up with the growth rate of new biologicalentities that require annotatio


# Comments
--> The UniProt paper that says the opposite is more convincing, IMO.

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34655326)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34655326)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34655326/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q34655326&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34655326/P921%3BP4510)  
