
Dovetailing biology and chemistry: integrating the Gene Ontology with the ChEBI chemical ontology.
==================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34878068]  

# Highlights

Many GO terms refer to chemical entities that participate in biological processes. To facilitate accurate and consistent systems-wide biological representation, it is necessary to integrate the chemical view of these entities with the biological view of GO functions and processes.

The GO and ChEBI have been constructed largely for different purposes and, until recently, have only been loosely connected.

Dovetail the two on- tologies, achieved through a combination of automated tools and the considerable efforts of domain experts in

eight sub-ontologies in the GO where chemical names were frequently used

cross-references between the GO and ChEBI were generated by a string-matching algorithm between GO terms and synonyms and ChEBI terms and synonyms. Those cros
s-references were then checked manually during the curation of the GO chemical ontology.

we also found cases where the chemicals were represented in both the GO and ChEBI, but the representation of
chemicals did not match due to differences in the terms themselves or in the hierarchical relationships
Glucose-6-phosphate’ is inherently a ‘hexose phosphate’ but NOT a ‘glucose’. Only relevant terms and their relationships are shown

pyridine’ can be ambiguous between the specific sense, corresponding to either ‘pyridine’ in ChEBI (CHEBI:16227) and to the EXACT reading in the notation of Corbett et al [33], or the collective sense corresponding to ‘pyridines’ in ChEBI (CHEBI:26421)

--> I believe this kind of ambiguity (class-subclass) is widespread in the life sciences.

From a struc- tural point of view, describing these complex chemicals is similar to the story of the blind men and the ele- phant, where each man describes the elephant as some- thing different depending upon the part he is touching.

For example, a nucleotide that contains a nucleobase, a sugar and at least one phosphate group would be de- scribed as a carbohydrate by a carbohydrate biochemist. would be misleadingly classified as is_a ‘carbohydrate metabolic process’ (GO:0005975). This is misleading because, since the carbohydrate portion of the nucleotide is not being metabolized.

inaccurate representation in the GO reflects the conflated use of nomenclature for acids and their conjugate bases in the biological community because these molecules often readily interconvert as they participate in biological processes.

As a result of this work and the close ties that were established between the GO and ChEBI during this process, all new GO terms that involve the transport, metabolism, response to chemical entities and homeo- stasis can be added to the ontology via a new web-based tool called TermGenie (http://go.termgenie.org/, Dietze et al., manuscript in preparation)

To identify the chemical entities referenced by GO terms, we automatically scanned the labels and synonyms for GO terms using the Obol tool [35], looking specifically for references to chemical terms either named in ChEBI or contained within ChEBI’s extensive synonym list. Che- mical terms referenced in the GO that were not yet present in ChEBI were identified by manual review of the relevant branches of the ontology (Table 2)
# Comments
