
Ontology based molecular signatures for immune cell types via gene expression analysis
======================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34978215]  
  
Publication date : 30 of August, 2013  

# Highlights

Here, we describe an ‘Ontologically BAsed Molecular Signature’ (OBAMS) method that identifies novel
cellular biomarkers and infers biological functions as characteristics of particular cell types. This method finds
molecular signatures for immune cell types based on mapping biological samples to the Cell Ontology (CL) and
navigating the space of all possible pairwise comparisons between cell types to find genes whose expression is
core to a particular cell type’s identity

--> Cool. 

We illustrate this ontological approach by evaluating expression data available from the Immunological
Genome project (IGP) to identify unique biomarkers of mature B cell subtype

. The CL has relationships to classes from other ontologies through the use of computable
definitions (i.e. “logical definitions” or “cross-products”)
[6,7]. These definitions have a genus-differentia structure
wherein the defined class is refined from a more general
class by some differentiating characteristics. For example, a “B-1a B cell” is a type of B-1 B cell that has the
CD5 glycoprotein on its cell surface. As the differentia
“CD5” is represented in the Protein Ontology (PR)
[8], a computable definition can then be created that
states “a ‘B-1a B cell; is_a [type of] ‘B-1 B cell’ that
has_plasma_membrane_part ‘T-cell surface glycoprotein
CD5 (PR:000001839)’”. 


Generation of computable definitions for immune cells
is complicated by the variety of ways in which immune
cells have been previously classified. The common practice of defining immune cell types using protein markers
and biological processes poses some problems when trying to encode this knowledge in an ontology. For example, follicular B cells are often described as expressing
CD23, while Bm1 B cells, a type of follicular B cell, are
characterized based on a lack of CD23 expression


The IGP cell types included
all mature myeloid and mature lymphocyte cell types for
which data were available at the time of analysis (10/25/
2010). A total of 88 cell types were analyzed including transitional B cell types.

--> Would a transitional type be a state?

By using our ontological framework, all the pairwise
comparison gene sets associated with a cell type can be
identified including those comparisons that are mapped
to an ontological descendant of a cell type, i.e. a subtype
of that cell type and further descendants through the
is_a hierarchy. For example, “germinal center B cell”
(Figure 2B) is one of 8 types of mature B cells analyzed
by the IGP consortium

Because associations in an ontology are
transitive, the genes associated to a general cell type are associated in every descendant cell type. For example, Cd19 is up-regulated in “mature B cell” meaning that expression
of Cd19 is observed to be up-regulated in every mature B
cell-subtype when its compared to any mature non-B cell
lymphocyte (i.e. T cell and NK cell types).

--> This can be logically true, but does that happens in reality? I guess some markers are not transitively useful. Markers are not always present in all cells of a type, as show recent single-cell studies.

Limits to this approach are demonstrated by the
absence of some expected cell markers, such as Spn
(MGI:98384), which encodes CD43, as a marker for all
B-1 B cells. In this case, Spn expression is low in one
subclass of B-1 B cells, that being B-1a B cells isolated
from the peritoneal cavity. This could be attributed to biological reasons, such as post-transcriptional modification
(which would not be observed at the transcript level) or to
experimental issues (such as poor probe hybridization).
Other potential issues are discussed below


Although some associations between the CL and GO have been curated in the
CL, this has proved a difficult task as there are large volumes of information to review and many inherent contradictions in the understanding of cell functions

Table 1 Summary of GO term enrichment for all up regulated genes in particular mature B cell subtypes

--> Good for Wikidata! 3.1. Cell-type markers in Wikidata

Thus, the complementary
approaches represented by network analysis and OBAMS
can identify new biomarkers in immune cell subtypes with
good reproducibility.

their diverse roles in executing the biological processes
necessary for sustaining life. Finding genes defining their
identity is a difficult task as genes whose expression is
restricted to any one cell type are rare

There are constraints to this approach. First, this approach requires consistent gene expression across all the
subtypes of a cell type being analyzed

Another issue that we have not addressed is the anatomical location of the cell types. The IGP project has
generated data from the same cell type isolated from different locations such as the spleen, lymph node, bone
marrow, and peritoneal cavity.


We have developed a novel method for
detecting pathways critical to cellular identity based on
gene expression analysis using the Cell Ontology (CL).
The CL is a manually constructed computer readable resource that links cell types by different relationships
such as develops_from or is_a (subtype of ).

--> Good description of what the CL  1.3.1.4. Cell Ontology (and CELDA) is

Preliminary mappings between the mature immune cells
sampled in the IGP and classes in the CL were established
using text matching based on cell type names. This was
followed by manual review of cell surface markers used.
Immune cell representation in the CL was found to be robust, and the few omissions were added to CL by editing
the ontology in OBO-Edit 2.1 [54].

# Comments
Add file 1 seems to have a good set of cell type names.


## Tags
1.3.1.4. Cell Ontology (and CELDA)
2.7. The concept of "cell marker"
3.1. Cell-type markers in Wikidata
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34978215)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34978215)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34978215/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Ontology%20based%20molecular%20signatures%20for%20immune%20cell%20types%20via%20gene%20expression%20analysis'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
