
Context-driven automatic subgraph creation for literature-based discovery
=========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q35557700]  
  
Publication date : 07 of February, 2015  

# Highlights

Multifaceted subgraphs can be captured using clustering based on shared context.

Discovery browsing using predicates and provenance in MEDLINE could enhance LBD.

In this paper we implement and evaluate a context-driven, automatic subgraph creation method that captures multifaceted complex associations between biomedical concepts to facilitate LBD.

To generate subgraphs, the set of all MEDLINE articles that contain either of the two specified concepts (A, C) are first collected. Then binary relationships or assertions, which are automatically extracted from the MEDLINE articles, called semantic predications, are used to create a labeled directed predications graph. In this predications graph, a path is represented as a sequence of semantic predications. The hierarchical agglomerative clustering (HAC) algorithm is then applied to cluster paths that are bounded by the two concepts (A, C)

These results suggest that leveraging the implicit and explicit semantics provided by manually assigned MeSH descriptors is an effective representation for capturing the underlying context of complex associations, along multiple thematic dimensions in LBD situations.

The second limitation is the degree of domain expertise still required for discovery browsing. Although impractical to eliminate, one improvement could be providing additional background knowledge to supplement the subgraphs where appropriate.

Across some experiments, we utilized predicate filters to eliminate non-informative relationships (such as associated_with, interacts_with, affects, etc). This is a compromise to achieve scalability


. Our approach is therefore an advancement of LBD research since it illustrates that notions of context and shared context can be important for making discoveries from scientific literature, which do not rely on statistical frequency, graph metrics or specificity



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q35557700)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q35557700)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q35557700&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JBI.2015.01.014)  
