
Geometry of the Gene Expression Space of Individual Cells
=========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q35688096]  

# Highlights

open question is whether cell types form discrete clusters or whether gene expression forms a continuum of states. If such a continuum exists, what is its geometry? Recent theory on evolutionary trade-offs suggests that cells that need to per- form multiple tasks are arranged in a polygon or polyhedron (line, triangle, tetrahedron and so on, generally called polytopes) in gene expression space, whose vertices are the expres- sion profiles optimal for each task.

We find cases in which single cells fill out a continuum of expression states within a polyhedron. This occurs in intestinal progenitor cells, which fill out a tetrahedron in gene expression space.

The present results suggest that the concept of cell type may be expanded. In addition to discreet clusters in gene-expression space, we suggest a new possibility: a continuum of states within a polyhedron, in which the vertices represent specialists at key tasks.

We find that cells are distributed inside polytopes, such as tetrahedrons or four-dimensional simplexes, with cells closest to each vertex responsible for a different key task.

The geometry ofhow cells are distributed in gene expression space is an open question. One
possibility is that each cell type forms a tight cluster, and that these clusters are well separated from each other. This assumption is at the heart ofclustering analyses ofgene expression data [22,23]. The tight-cluster picture relates to the idea ofdiscrete cell types, which is supported by the exis- tence ofmarker genes that are mutually exclusive between cells. When considering a set ofmany genes, in contrast to only marker genes, it is possible that cells also formmore continuous distributions in gene expression space

Based on theory on evolutionary tradeoffs between tasks [28], we expect that cells should
fall in a low-dimensional polytope whose vertices are the points optimal in each task alone

Fig 5. Mouse and human colon lower crypt cells fall on similar triangles and show a similar distribution within the triangle. (a) Mouse colon lower crypt cells dataset by [37], plotted on its first 2PCs plane

The five archetypes are each enriched with genes that clearly define a specific cell type (CD4 T cells, CD8 T cells, monocytes/ macrophages, B cells and non-leukocytes)

Fig 6. Different tissues analyzed by different single-cell technologies show polytopes and tasks. (a) Human bone marrow cells analyzed by single-cell mass cytometry [13,25] in which proteins are detected using mass-tagged antibodies is well described by a 4D simplex (a polytope with 5 vertices).

--> Very nice figure

Some datasets fall into distinct clusters, with one cluster near each vertex, and thus support a picture of distinct and well-separated cell types. Other contexts, such as intestinal progenitor cells and spleen dendritic cells, show a continuum ofgene expres- sion states which uniformly fills the tetrahedron, supporting a picture ofa continuous range of cell states that carry out mixtures ofthe biological functions defined by the vertices. These find- ings expand the concept of cell type, by demonstrating the possibility ofa polyhedral contin- uum ofexpression states: cells can range between being task specialists near the vertices ofthe polyhedron, and generalists suitable for multiple tasks near the center.

It is interesting to ask when is it better to design distinct cell types with separated biological
functions, and when to design a continuum of cell expression states. Distinct cell types have the advantage ofbeing specialists at a given task, with optimal function. However, if the propor- tions ofthe tasks needed in the tissue changes more rapidly than the ability to make new cells or to adjust their protein composition, a continuum of states may have an advantage. It allows a reserve of cells (cells in the middle ofthe polyhedron) that can perform multiple functions, albeit less optimally than specialists, and can therefore be recruited to each task in times of need.

--> Full synthetic biology consideration!

Similarly, the continuum observed between intestinal progenitors, nodal cells and entero-
cytes (Figs 2c and 5b) suggests a gradual differentiation process, with the nodal cells—a new class of cells defined in the present study—possibly an intermediate station between progenitors and enterocytes.


More generally, this study indicates that the concept of cell type may be expanded. In addition to separated clusters in gene-expression space, we suggest a new possibility: a continuum of states within a polyhedron, in which the vertices represent specialists at key tasks, with generalist cells lying in the middle.


# Comments

Interesting framework, and a model that fits scRNA-seq data. The question that remains is how this would be integrated to the ways biologists handle knowledge. It seems a nice way to understand how cells fit to types, but difficult to use this for, for example, create models to study drug response, for example. 



# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q35688096)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q35688096)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q35688096/P921%3BP4510)  
