
Exploiting semantic relations for literature-based discovery.
=============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q35725188]  

# Highlights

We propose using semantic predications to enhance
literature-based discovery (LBD) systems, which
currently depend exclusively on co-occurrence of
words or concepts in target documents.

by the combined application of two natural language
processing systems, BioMedLEE and SemRep, are
coupled with an LBD system BITOLA. Initial
experiments suggest this approach can uncover new
associations that were not possible using previous
methods

Current literature-based discovery systems (for
example [1-8]) use simple concept co-occurrence as
their primary mechanism. No semantic information
about the nature of the relation between concepts is
provided.

BioMedLEE is a recent adaptation of
MedLEE [11,12], which was developed to structure
and encode clinical information in the patient
record. BioMedLEE is based on a grammar
formalism that combines syntax and semantics and
uses MedLEE's lexicon derived from clinical
documents, the UMLS, and other online biomedical
knowledge sources, such as some of the ontologies in
the Open Biomedical Ontologies (OBO)
(http://obo.sourceforge.net/)

Another research contribution is the use of two
natural language processing systems, namely
SemRep and BioMedLee, to extract the kind of
relations they are best at capturing. This entailed
developing a common format for each system’s
output. To our knowledge this is the first time two
different natural language processing systems have
been utilized together to capture different types of
semantic relations


Figure 1. Discovery pattern Maybe_Treats. Maybe_Treats1 proposes Z1 (drug or substance) as a new
treatment for disease X because Z1 causes opposite change to Y1 (function or substance) and the change of
Y1 is a characteristic of disease X. Maybe_Treats2 proposes Z2 as a new treatment of X because there is a
similar disease, X2, and drug Z2 is known to treat X2

--> It is some advancement, but still very crude.
# Comments

## Tags
1.1.1
3.2

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q35725188)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q35725188)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q35725188/P921%3BP4510)  
