
Regulatory Logic of Pan-Neuronal Gene Expression in C. elegans.
===============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q35984619]  
  
Publication date : 01 of August, 2015  

# Highlights

The authors show that the expression of
pan-neuronal genes is controlled by a
common organizational principle,
characterized by redundant, parallelacting cis-regulatory modules. This
functional organization is strikingly
distinct from the control of neuron-typespecific genes,

Neuron-type-specific genes are generally controlled
by discrete and non-redundantly acting regulatory
inputs, while pan-neuronal gene expression is
controlled by diverse, coincident and seemingly
redundant regulatory inputs

Given the previous
paucity of insights into the regulation of pan-neuronal gene
expression, our study provides a substantial advance in our understanding of how neurons acquire their terminal properties.

Notably, some proteins generally used as ‘‘generic neuronal
markers’’ in the vertebrate nervous system are not expressed
in some neuronal populations (e.g., TuJ1 [b-tubulin 3] is not expressed in all neuronal cells in the retina ; NeuN [RBFOX3] is not expressed in Purkinje and some
neuronal retinal cells [Mullen et al., 1992]).

--> 2.7. The concept of "cell marker"

To facilitate the assessment of
expression in the nervous system, in all fosmid reporter constructs the fluorescent reporter gene was inserted at the 30 end
of the respective locus, separated from the locus with an SL2
trans-spliced leader sequence (Tursun et al., 2009). This allows
the reporter protein to be produced independently of the usually
subcellularly (e.g., synaptically) localized pan-neuronal protein.
Through the addition of a NLS and a histone (H2B) tag, the fluorescent reporter is then targeted to the nucleus, allowing for
reliable quantification by counting the number of neuronal nuclei
in different ganglia (Figures 1D, S1A, and S1B).

--> Cool system

d rab-3 reporter gene construct, containing around 35 kb of genomic sequences including neighboring genes, as well as a transcriptional reporter gene fusion
containing 4.3-kb sequences of upstream regions and the first
intron (shown in Figure S3) are both expressed in 99% (300/
302) of all neurons of the adult nervous system (Figure 1E). The
only neurons in which we did not observe rab-3 expression are
the canal-associated neurons (CANs), a neuron pair that was
previously noted for its scarcity of synaptic connections with
other neurons (White et al., 1986).

--> So we have a class of "rab-3-expressing neurons"

We scored the expression of all 26 fosmid reporter lines relative to the transcriptional rab-3 reference reporter (rab-3prom1::
TagRFP) and found that, like rab-3prom1, 23 of the 26 examined
reporters drive expression in all neurons of the nervous system

--> "all" is a bit of a stretch, and they know it.


Taken together, as illustrated by the color scheme in Figure 1C,
we have defined a battery of genes that are truly pan-neuronal
(i.e., expressed in all cells of the nervous system). Most (but
not all) pan-neuronal genes are also expressed in a variety of
distinct patterns outside the nervous system, but usually at
much lower levels and often in just a very restricted set of
secretory cells. A consistent overlap of expression of all of these
genes is restricted to the nervous system.

--> 3.1. Cell-type markers in Wikidata ?

Our data suggest a fundamental difference between the mechanisms that control neuron-type-specific genes and pan-neuronal
genes. Whereas the expression of pan-neuronal genes depends
on multiple parallel regulatory inputs, conferred by terminal selectors plus additional regulatory factors, neuron-type-specific
genes depend solely on terminal selector transcription factors
(schematized in Figure 8). This is evidenced by the fact that
fosmid reporter expression of a number of neuron-type-specific
terminal identity genes is abolished in terminal selector mutants
of the respective neuron type, as summarized in Figure 7A. For
example, a fosmid-based reporter for the choline transporter
cho-1, which is exclusively expressed in cholinergic neurons, is
controlled by (i) the terminal selector unc-3 in the VNC MNs,
(ii) the terminal selector ttx-3 in the cholinergic interneuron AIY,
and (iii) the terminal selector lim-4 in the olfactory neuron AWB
(Figure 7A)


# Comments
Dense article, lots of information.

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q35984619)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q35984619)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q35984619/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q35984619&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q35984619/P921%3BP4510)  
