
The SBOL Stack: A Platform for Storing, Publishing, and Sharing Synthetic Biology Designs.
==========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q36042745]  
  
Publication date : 07 of June, 2016  

# Highlights

. In orderto achieve these goals, the development of an infrastructure to store, retrieve, andexchange SBOL data is necessary. To address this problem, we have developed theSBOL Stack, aResource Description Framework(RDF) database specifically designed forthe storage, integration, and publication of SBOL data.

The SBOL Stack includes two Webinterfaces: the SBOL Stack API and SynBioHub.

Different tools and repositories from multiple organizations. Forinstance, SBOL models can be constructed usingcomputer-aided design(CAD) tools such as SynBad,4iBioSim,5andTinkerCell.6Sequence alignment can be performed on anSBOL document using tools such as Vector NTI ExpressDesigner.7SBOL designs can be stored and retrieved fromrepositories such as the Flowers Virtual Parts Repository8andJBEI-ICE9either during construction or after the design hasbeen completed. 

--> Yeah, super cool.

Figure 1.A graphical visualization of an SBOL version 2ComponentDefinitionand associated triples. Each edge,together with the two connected nodes, represents a triple. Forsimplicity, URIs are represented in angle brackets using qualifiers, suchassofor the Sequence Ontology

--> NOICE

The SBOLStack is based on a Sesame RDF triplestore (http://rdf4j.org)16specifically designed for publishing a library of synthetic partsand designs as a service, for storing designs of biologicalsystems locally

e have created a sample instance of the SBOL Stack thatprovides access to the complete iGEM Registry of StandardBiological Parts in SBOL version 2 format. This instance alsoincludes semantically enriched integrated data from seven datasources describingBacillus subtilis,17coupled with the SyBiOntontology18dealing with genetic features, gene products andtheir annotations, gene regulatory networks, metabolic path-ways, and other useful information. The SyBiOnt ontologyprovides a useful framework for developers to integrate furtherbiological data sets with SBOL version 2.

--> Noice

he provided SBOL Stack instance can be queriedprogrammatically using the API or through SPARQL queries.For example, the list of all promoters from all the differentsources in this SBOL Stack instance can be retrieved using asingle query. The role property of aComponentDefini-tionentity indicates the genetic feature represented and isspecified with Sequence Ontology12(SO) terms. InFigure 5,this property is used together with the SO promoter term(SO:0000167)tofilter for promoter definitions only.

In addition to the SBOL Stack, we have also developed aweb-based tool, SynBioHub, that allows the end user to accessthe SBOL designs in the SBOL Stack


# Comments

3.9 Semantic Systems and Synthetic Biology


## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q36042745)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q36042745)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q36042745/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q36042745&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q36042745/P921%3BP4510)  
