
Distinction of Neurons, Glia and Endothelial Cells in the Cerebral Cortex: An Algorithm Based on Cytological Features
=====================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q36193595]  

# Highlights

. Unfortunately, the lack of detailed, updated, systematic and well-illustrated descriptions of the cytology of neurons and glial cell types, especially in the primate brain, makes such studies especially demanding, often limiting their scope and broad use.Here, following an extensive analysis of histological materials and the review of current and classical literature, we compile a list of precise morphological criteria that can facilitate and standardize identification of cells in stained sections examined under the microscope.

we summarize the core features that distinguish each cell type in easy-to-use tables and sketches, and structure these key features in an algorithm that can be used to systematically distinguish cellular types in the cerebral cortex

glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) is specific for astrocytes in the adult nervous system, but labels mostly fibrillary and reactive astrocytes while a lot of protoplasmic and non-reactive astrocytes remain unlabeled. Similarly, several markers are used to label oligodendrocytes but none labels the entire oligodendrocyte population (Ness et al., 2005).

the Nissl technique stains the entire population of neurons and glial cell types in the same section. Second, the Nissl technique stains differentially all cell types of nervous tissue allowing distinction and identification of all cells

--> A bit too strong affirmation.

Unfortunately, descriptions of neurons and glia in quantitative studies are usually brief and incomplete and the researcher has to dive in to the classical literature to find detailed cytological descriptions of neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and microglia (Ramón Y Cajal, 1896; Del Río-Hortega, 1919; Schlote, 1959)

Thus, there is a lack of detailed, updated, systematic and well-illustrated descriptions of the cytology of neurons and glial cell types, especially in the primate brain.

The procedures and results are organized as follows: we first describe systematically and in detail the cytological features of neurons and glial cell types in the cerebral cortex of the macaque monkey and the human using semithin and thick sections stained for Nissl (Figures 1–6). We corroborate key distinguishing characteristics of different cell types in sections processed for immunohistochemistry markers counterstained with Nissl (Figure 7) and in ultrathin sections processed for electron microscopy (Figures 8, 9). Then we summarize the core features that distinguish each cell type in easy-to-use tables (Tables 2, 3) and sketches (Figure 10) and we structure these key features in an algorithm (Figure 11) that can be used to systematically distinguish cellular types in the cerebral cortex.

--> Very nice organization.

We describe systematically the cytological features of neurons and glial cell types in the rhesus monkey and human cerebral cortex using a standardized nomenclature for nuclear structures according


Neurons always have visible cytoplasm around the nucleus. A small rim of cytoplasm circling the entire nucleus is a useful feature to distinguish small neurons from astrocytes. The cytoplasm of large pyramidal neurons of elderly people usually contains yellowish lipofuscin granules and smaller neurons in the human cortex also have some lipofuscin granules. In the human limbic cortices studied (areas 24, 25, 32), most large neurons were pyramidal but some large neurons in layers V and VI had fusiform shape (Figure 6) and could correspond to von Economo neurons (Watson et al., 2006).

Endothelial cells (orange arrowheads, Figures 1–6) are not glial cells but must be taken into account in stereological studies of the cortex because of their resemblance to astrocytes in the monkey and to microglia in the human. The cytoplasm of endothelial cells is not stained. The shape of endothelial nucleus is rectangular with rounded corners.

One more cell type in central nervous tissue deserves brief comment. Pericytes are cells involved in the blood-brain barrier. They are found within the basal membrane (BM) of the endothelium, while glial satellites of blood vessels are found outside the endothelial BM. In semithin sections, toluidine blue stains the BM ofthe endothelium and pericytes can be identified, because of their unique position within the BM. 


TABLE 3 | Cytological features of neurons and glial cell types in Nissl stained (thionin) thick sections of the monkey and human cerebral cortex.

--> Multispecies descriptions! Archetypes.

FIGURE 10 | Hand-drawings of typical examples of neuron and glial cell types from Nissl stained sections of the cerebral cortex of the monkey (upper panels) and human (lower panels). (A) Large neurons, (B) Small neurons, (C) Astrocytes, (D) Oligodendrocytes, (E) Microglia and (F) Endothelial cells. Asterisks mark glial satellites to neurons. Calibration bar in (F) applies to (A–F)

--> Nice drawings!

FIGURE 11 | An algorithm to systematically distinguish cell types in the primate cerebral cortex. 

--> The algorithm itself shows a structure for classification of cell types.

Most cell profiles are easy to distinguish and identify, for instance large neurons. But some cell profiles can be ambiguous and require careful examination of every cytological feature. Here we specifically address the distinction of cell types with ambiguous profiles that may lead to erroneous classifications. The first potential pitfall is the distinction between small neurons and astrocytes, which is reported as one of the most difficult in the stereology literature (von Bartheld et al., 2016).

Precise and systematic descriptions of the cytological features of neuron and glial cell types are needed for unbiased quantification of cells in the brain. We have systematically described the features of neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, microglial and endothelial cells in sections of the rhesus monkey and human cerebral cortex stained for Nissl at the optical microscope
# Comments
Interesting descriptions.


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q36193595)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q36193595)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q36193595/P921%3BP4510)  
