
Online tools to support literature-based discovery in the life sciences.
========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q36280460]  

# Highlights
Not only are text-mining and information extraction tools needed to render the biomedical
literature accessible but the results of these tools can also assist researchers in the formulation and evaluation of novel hypotheses. This requires an additional set of technological approaches that are defined here as literature-based discovery (LBD) tools

. This paper presents an overview of recent LBD research and discusses methodology, results and online tools that are available to the scientific community

Implicit knowledge that can only be inferred from existing knowledge is
not available through standard tools, but may be very valuable when conducting
research.

Figure 1: Swanson’s ABC model of discovery. If A and B are related, and B and C
are related, it follows that A and C might be indirectly related.

Most systems provide a list of hypotheses rank-ordered according to certain
likelihood, for instance, the number of intermediate B concepts of a certain AC
hypothesis. In contrast to text-mining and information extraction approaches, there
is no straightforward evaluation possible as it is not easy to establish the correctness of generated hypotheses.

Most literature-based proposed
hypotheses are well motivated, very
specific and directly testable

Up to now, the emphasis of the textmining techniques employed by LBD
tools has been on the correct
identification of biomedical terms in text.
Most approaches use the UMLS
Metathesaurus as the source of terms.
When deploying LBD in a genomics
context, this may be a limiting factor
because the coverage of gene and proteins
in the UMLS is low

--> It has grown, but Wikidata is still bigger.

A fine example is the
Chilibot system.48 Its basic operation is to
extract relationships between genes,
chemicals and diseases and to visualise
these relationships in a network of nodes
with edges indicating the type and
direction of the relationship. It is possible
to look for nodes that are not directly
connected but have one (or more)
intermediate node(s) that are connected to
the disconnected ones. In fact, many
more text-mining tools that produce
similar biological networks, for instance
PubGene,49 iHOP50 and Dragon,51 may
be used for LBD purposes. 


Hypotheses that have been formulated
with the discussed tools are in many cases
highly specific and well motivated. In
fact, the better motivated such a potential
discovery is, the easier it is to test it. As
seen in the LBD literature, novel
discoveries are indeed directly testable
once animal models or patient data and
material are available. We would therefore like to encourage biomedical
scientists to use literature-based discovery
tools to extend, follow-up, substantiate
and explore their ideas, hunches,
observations and intuitions.

# Comments



## Tags

1.1.1

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q36280460)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q36280460)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q36280460/P921%3BP4510)  
