
MetaSRA: normalized human sample-specific metadata for the Sequence Read Archive.
=================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q36378619]  
  
Publication date : 01 of September, 2017  

# Highlights

We present MetaSRA, a database of normalized SRA human sample-specific metadata following a schema inspired by the metadata organization of the ENCODE project

Unfortunately, such studies are currently difficult due to the poor structure of the metadata associated with samples in the SRA. These metadata are centrally stored at the BioSample database (Barrett et al., 2012), with each SRA sequencing experiment referencing a sample-specific metadata record within this database.

Furthermore, despite the imposed structure of a key-value description, many of the values are complex, natural language text. 

Without uniformly labelled samples, it remains difficult to perform large meta-analyses across the SRA

B) Sample-specific key-value pairs describing sample SRS872370. Note the reference to an external cell line BJ. We also note that ‘forskin fibroblast’ is an incorrect spelling. Lastly, the value ‘no’ negates the key ‘lentiviral transgenes.’

Manual annotation allows for high accuracy at the cost of low throughput. For example, the RNASeqMetaDB provides a database of manually annotated terms associated with a set of mouse RNA-seq experiments (Guo et al., 2015). This database describes only 306 RNA-seq experiments, which represents a small subset of all experiments in the SRA.

We assert that entity recognition alone is insufficient for automating the normalization of the SRA’s sample-specific metadata. Rather, since many of the sample’s descriptions mention ontology terms that describe extraneous entities (such as the study and experiment), a suitable solution should seek to extract only those terms that are being used to describe the biology of the sample

For example, a cell culture that consists of stem cells differentiated into fibroblast cells may be annotated as both ‘stem cells’ and as ‘fibroblast.’ Such annotation leaves ambiguity as to whether the sample was differentiated from stem cells, or rather, was reprogrammed into a pluripotent state from primary fibroblasts. 

This schema is comprised of three parts:

Sample labels, using terms from the following biomedical ontologies: Disease Ontology (Kibbe et al., 2015), Cell Ontology (Bard et al., 2005), Uberon (Mungall et al., 2012), Experimental Factor Ontology (EFO) (Malone et al., 2010) and the Cellosaurus (http://web.expasy.org/cellosaurus).

A sample-type classification, with six sample-type categories similar to those used by ENCODE.

Standardized numerical properties of the sample.

Labelling metadata using ontology terms allows for queries of the data that utilize the structured knowledge of the ontology. For example, a query for ‘brain’ samples may return samples labelled with ‘cerebral cortex’ because the cerebral cortex is a component of the brain.

We restrict R

to the following types of relationships:

    has phenotype: Maps samples to phenotypic or disease terms.

    derives from: Maps samples to cell lines or, when the sample consists of differentiated cells, to stem cell terms.

    part of: Maps samples to the anatomical entity from which it was extracted.

    consists of cells of type: Maps samples to their constituent cell types.

    underwent: Maps samples to ontology terms that describe a medical or experimental protocol.


4. The Cell Ontology term for ‘cultured cell’ is not mentioned in this description; however, by the fact that it was explicitly stated that the cell was passaged, we can infer that the sample consists of cultured cells. Thus we map the sample to ‘cultured cell’ via the ‘consists of cells of type’ relationship.

For example, given the key-value pair cell line: MCF-7, the sample would consequently map to ‘adenocarcinoma’ because the MCF-7 cell line was established from a breast adenocarcinoma tumor. MetaSRA includes both explicit and consequent mappings.

We perform fuzzy string matching between all artifacts and ontology terms to find all exact matches and minor misspellings (for misspelling criteria, see Supplementary Materials). For example, in Figure 3, both the strings ‘fibroblasts’ and ‘fibroblast’ fuzzily match to the ontology term for ‘fibroblast’.

We scraped cell line metadata for all cell lines that are present in the Cellosaurus.

--> They are rather nicely available via Wikidata.

We maintain a list of ontology terms that define real-value properties. Currently, we use 6 terms: ‘age’, ‘passage number’, ‘timepoint’, ‘age at diagnosis’, ‘body mass index’ and ‘age at death.’ 

The first test dataset was created by manually annotating the sample-types for the 422 samples that were used for evaluating our ontology term mapping procedure. As noted previously, no two samples in this dataset belong to the same study.

For example, tissue samples tend to be described by an anatomical term in the Uberon ontology and not described by a specific cell type in the Cell Ontology. Lastly, we identified the most common ontology terms (Fig. 6C) and real value properties (Table 1) in the MetaSRA. In general, the error rate for the most common ontology terms was quite low (see Supplementary Materials). 

(C) The most commonly mapped terms for each ontology. Only the most-specifically mapped terms for each sample are considered

Future work will involve expanding MetaSRA to incorporate more biological samples as well as to expand the set of ontologies used for annotation. First, we plan to expand MetaSRA to all human samples (not only those used in RNA-seq experiments). We will also expand the set of ontologies to those that include experimental variables. For example, we hope to include the ChEBI ontology for annotating samples with chemical treatments (Hastings et al., 2013).

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q36378619)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q36378619)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q36378619/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q36378619&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTX334)  
