
Representation of probabilistic scientific knowledge.
=====================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q36786073]  
  
Publication date : 15 of April, 2013  

# Highlights

The ontology HELO is designed to support probabilistic reasoning, and provides semantic descriptors for reporting on research
that involves operations with probabilities. HELO explicitly links research statements
such as hypotheses, models, laws, conclusions, etc. to the associated probabilities of
these statements being true. 

We demonstrate the utility of HELO
on three worked examples: changes in the probability of the hypothesis that sirtuins
regulate human life span; changes in the probability of hypotheses about gene
functions in the S. cerevisiae aromatic amino acid pathway; and the use of active
learning in drug design (quantitative structure activity relation learning), where a
strategy for the selection of compounds with the highest probability of improving
on the best known compound was used.

HELO is open source and available at
https://github.com/larisa-soldatova/HEL


Karl Popper arguing that probabilities cannot be applied to scientific theories
on the grounds that an infinite number of theories can explain any scientific data,
therefore their a priori probabilities are zero. This view is now generally disregarded

--> Why is it disregarded, though? Disregarded != proved wrong. I guess it is just a matter of what people mean by "theory" and "probability."

The Bayesian approach is arguably the only rational method for updating beliefs

While experimental data from good laboratories are likely to
be true, even research statements extracted from very high impact journals are not
necessarily valid. C.G. Bengley and L.M. Ellis in their recent article in Nature report
that scientific findings have been confirmed only in 6 out of 53 “landmark” studies in
haematology and oncology

recording of probabilities that research statements are true, and for probabilistic reasoning with
such statements.

--> Well, am improvement of 1.2.2 for sure, but for that we need first that statements are resolvable, i.e. it is possible to say wether they are "true" or "false". That requires a detailed modeling of reality and an agreement on what is true and what is not. Otherwise you'd need to compound the probability that the statement _can_ be true.


HELO defines a hierarchy of research statements: research hypothesis, hypotheses set
(a collection of hypotheses with a total probability 1, it usually combines research
hypotheses, negative hypotheses, and alternative hypotheses, see [7] for more detail),
assumption, conclusion, scientific law (models and generic rules, including Bayes rule),
theorem (including Bayes theorem).

Figure 1 An example of the HELO representation of a research statement. The figure shows the
representation of the values of the prior and posterior probabilities of the research statement about
sirtuins, and also the supporting and refuting evidence

Conclusion
Scientific knowledge is inherently uncertain. There is therefore a need for a representation that focuses on the probabilistic features of research statements, and supports probabilistic reasoning. In order to address this need we proposed the ontology HELO that
supports probabilistic reasoning over uncertain scientific statements

# Comments
HELO seems like an interesting ontology for Wikidata.

I feel that the proposal is too bold for our age, when scientists have not even heard of formal languages. Maybe in 20, 30 years this can be implemented in practice.

## Tags
1.2.2
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q36786073)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q36786073)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q36786073/P921%3BP4510)  
