
New insights into the classification and nomenclature of cortical GABAergic interneurons
========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q36747163]  

# Highlights

A systematic classification and accepted nomenclature of neuron types is much needed but is currently lacking. This article describes a possible taxonomical solution for classifying GABAergic interneurons of the cerebral cortex based on a novel, web-based interactive system that allows experts to classify neurons with pre-determined criteria.

These results demonstrate a practical and objective approach to the naming, characterization and classification of neurons based on community consensus.

This distinction was well described by John Hughlings Jackson2
in 1874: “There are two ways
of investigating diseases, and two kinds of classification corresponding thereto, the empirical and the scientific. The former is to be illustrated by the way in which a gar‑ dener classifies plants, the latter by the way in which a botanist classifies them. The former is, strictly speaking, only an arrangement. The gardener arranges his plants as they are fit for food, for ornament, etc. One of his classifica‑ tions of ornamental plants is into trees, shrubs, and flowers. His object is the direct application of knowledge to utilitar‑ ian purposes. It is, so to speak, practical. The other kind of classification (the classification properly so‑called) is rather for the better organization of existing knowledge, and for discovering the relations of new facts; its princi‑ ples are methodical guides to further investigation. It is of great utilitarian value, but not directly.”

--> Beautiful quote.

Figure 1 | The web-based interactive system. Screenshot of one of the 320 neurons included in the web-based interactive system. Also shown are the six axonal features and their categories (with possible values for each feature) displayed for the experts so they can select, for each feature, the category that is the most appropriate to describe the morphology of the neuron.

Two major classes of cortical neurons: principal cells and interneurons. Before the discovery of the Golgi method, the existence of different morphological types of cortical neurons was already recognized5

At present most neuroscientists agree on the usage of terms such as pyramidal neuron, non‑pyramidal neuron, interneuron and chandelier (or axo‑axonic) cell. These cell types are readily distinguished by their clear morphological attributes. However, other common names, such as double bouquet cell, Martinotti cell, neu‑ rogliaform cell and basket cell, seem to lack a consensual definition.

--> Interesting notion of an espontaneous, consensual definition.

What is a cortical interneuron? By our definition, a cortical interneuron is a short‑axon cell — that is, a neuron with an axon that does not leave the neocortex — and has a soma that is located in the cerebral cortex.

Traditionally, interneurons have been subdivided into two main groups14: spiny non‑pyramidal cells and
aspiny or sparsely spiny non‑pyramidal cells.

Following the approach of the Petilla terminology, we concentrate our effort on GABAergic cortical interneu‑ rons, thus excluding the majority of spiny non‑pyram‑ idal cells from the classification attempt. 

A good example is the double bouquet cell, a term adopted inconsistently in the literature. Some authors use this name for neurons with a bitufted den‑ dritic morphology, regardless of the pattern of axonal arborization. Other authors use the term double bou‑
quet cells for neurons with descending axons that form tightly intertwined bundles of long descending verti‑ cal collaterals resembling a horse tail11
. Although these
cells may have bitufted dendrites, interneurons with the same axonal patterns but with different somatodendritic morphologies also exist14
. We propose that cortical
interneurons identified by these characteristic axonal bundles be called ‘horse‑tail’ cells.

We defined a limited number of cell types for this classification step (see the Gardener Classification website) on the basis of recognizable morphological characteristics

Figure 2 | Schematics of the morphological features. For each feature, the experts had to select the category that best described the neuron on display.

When an insufficient number of morphological axonal features are visualized for a given interneuron (because of incomplete staining, tissue slicing and so on), we propose that the cell should be deemed an anatomically ‘uncharacterized’ interneuron.

--> Nice system.

Images of the 320 interneurons included in the experiment were obtained either from the NeuroMorpho website35
or by scanning two‑dimensional drawings from previous publications. Altogether, this pool includes interneurons from different areas and layers of the cerebral cortex of the mouse, rat, rabbit, cat, monkey and human (Supplementary infor‑ mation S1).

--> Archetypes

Less than 10% of neurons were rated as anatomically uncharacterized.

Overall observed agreement (circles) and chance-corrected Fleiss’ pi index (crosses; see Supplementary information S1) for each feature, indicating the degree of concordance between the experts. c Chance-corrected (Fleiss’ pi index) agreement achieved in each category of each feature. Categories of the same feature are shown using lines with the same colour.

Finally, we checked whether the names given to the
79 neurons that were scanned from original publica‑ tions were maintained in the present experiment by the authors of those publications. Interestingly, the authors were frequently inconsistent in naming certain neurons. For example, some neurons named neurogliaform cells in the original publication were classified as uncharac‑ terized in the current experiment by the same author.

The ultimate goal of our experiment was to build a model that could automatically classify a neuron on the basis of its morphological characteristics and, more specifically, in terms of the six features defined in the present study. A supervised classifier is a model that can assign a category to a neuron based on its characteristics. Such a classifier must be trained with a dataset of neurons for which the true category is known

Because supervised classification tools require a single class value for each neuron, we used a naive approach of assigning to each neuron the category that received the highest number of votes. 

--> Hm, I feel like there are better ways of doing it. I thought there were ways of predicting multiclasses (perhaps weighted, but weights should not ber necessary).

This study empirically and quantitatively demonstrates that the gardener’s approach to neuron classification is untenable at this time and confirms the impression that different investigators use their own, mutually inconsist‑ ent schemes for classifying neurons based on morpho‑ logical criteria. Many ambiguities are independent of the relative reconstruction quality and completeness of the tested neurons.

A solution: the Neuroclassifier. How might the situation be improved? On the basis of the supervised classifica‑ tion models described here, we have started the develop‑ ment of a computer tool for automatic classification of neurons, a ‘Neuroclassifier’. This machine will initially use probabilistic labels — based on the categories provided by experts — as neuron names and will evolve by combin‑ ing supervised (known labels) and unsupervised (new labels) classification techniques. This may foster naming unification, robust classification and education of new students in the field through online learning techniques. As the scientific community uses the tool, more data will be incorporated into the Neuroclassifier, allowing model updates and increasing classification robustness and accuracy.

Importantly, it should be kept in mind that the pre‑
sent analysis is limited to neurons from a small number of species, namely mammals commonly used in brain research.

Although several ‘canoni‑ cal’ neuronal morphologies are doubtlessly common to all placental mammals, some species (such as cetartiodactyls and xenarthrans) depart from the commonly observed neuron types41,42
. Future inclusion of other species in the Neuroclassifier will allow detailed analysis of evolutionary conservation and species‑specific neuron types

--> Nice limitation statement.
# Comments

Wonderful historical overview.

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q36747163)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q36747163)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q36747163/P921%3BP4510)  
