
The neuron classification problem
=================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q36854753]  

# Highlights

A systematic account of neuron cell types is a basic prerequisite for determining the vertebrate nervous system global wiring diagram. With comprehensive lineage and phylogenetic information unavailable, a general ontology based on structure-function taxonomy is proposed and implemented in a knowledge management system, and a prototype analysis of select regions (including retina, cerebellum, and hypothalamus) presented

classification criteria based on the original literature and “Petilla Convention” guidelines, hierarchies, and relations—with annotations documenting each ontology entry.

lineage analysis has contributed relatively little beyond identifying two daughter cell types (neurons and glia) generated from embryonic neuroepithelial stem cells and their regionalization patterns in neural plate, tube, and crest (Brown et al., 2001).

there is not even a satisfactory definition of neuron cell type, with terms like “class”, “subclass”, “type”, and “subtype” often used interchangeably without proper definition (Cook, 1998; Masland, 2004). Obviously, a systematic account of neuron cell types is a prerequisite for establishing the nervous system's basic wiring diagram and determining the functional significance of molecular mechanisms in specific circuit elements.

All classification schemas parcel a set into distinguishable subsets, and are either monothetic or polythetic. Monothetic taxonomy identifies most important characters or “essences” of classified objects (Rowe and Stone, 1977), whereas the polythetic approach emerged from numerical taxonomy and classifies objects by overall degree of similarity/difference calculated over many properties (Bailey, 1994).

Basically, polythetic classifications are empirical whereas monothetic approaches are deductive (Bailey, 1994).

Polythetic neuron classification schemas are best regarded not as cell type definitions, but instead as hypotheses that cell taxa fulfill distinct functional roles (Rowe and Stone, 1977). Viewing neuron classifications as hypotheses is advantageous because they can be tested with more data or new methods, then changed accordingly or discarded (Cook, 1998; Rowe and Stone, 1977).

--> Yep, agreed. 

systems neuroscientists may prefer a neuron taxonomy based on axonal connections), whereas pharmacologists and developmental neuroscientists may prefer one based on gene expression patterns

alternate classification schemas for neurons (and regions, Fig. 1b) may coexist and be compared provided relationships between all terms are defined. In short, proper definition of all terms in a set, and relations between terms, are fundamental to domain knowledge representation in any ontology (Gruber, 1993), and classification criteria, considered next, are basic to classification

he Brain Architecture Knowledge Management System (http:/brancusi.usc.edu/bkms) has four interoperable modules: Brain parts (macroscopic gray matter regions, fiber tracts, and ventricles), Cell types (microscopic composition of gray matter regions), Neuroanatomical projections (axonal connections between regions and/or cell types), and Molecules (detected in brain parts and cell types).

--> the website did not load.

Neuron ontology that allows inserting—and online querying about—vertebrate neuron names, definitions, classification criteria, and hierarchies.

The ontology being built first as a set of terms and relationships between them must be open, so that new terms or nomenclatures can be added. All of these methodological constraints for constructing neuron ontologies have been proposed before, and were articulated most recently in the “Petilla Convention.”

Terms are uniquely identified in BAMS's Neuron ontology by name, species, and nomenclature.

The next hierarchy level, neuron classes occupies a transitional place in terms of monothetic and polythetic classification—neuron classes in this scheme are found in highly differentiated regions and are established across species (e.g., all vertebrates, or all mammals). They are usually determined monothetically, although polythetic analyses also refer to them.

--> Archetypes.

Parameters included in each criterion and subcriterion were derived from the original literature, as well as various attempts to classify neurons, such as the guidelines of the “Pettila Convention”. Taxonomic relations established between terms in BAMS's Neuron ontology can be documented already by any combination of more than 100 criteria and parameters, which are readily extensible.

The critical effort to populate BAMS's Neuron ontology began with the rat CNS.

On one hand, it is universally agreed that the vertebrate retina contains 5 general neuron classes: photoreceptors (sensory neurons); horizontal, bipolar, and amacrine cells (local interneurons); and ganglion cells (projection interneurons)—yet on the other hand a large number of terms have been used to name various neuron populations in many species including rat.

The entire rat retina Neuron Ontology is necessarily constructed from monothetic nomenclatures. Therefore, terms included in neuron type and neuron group levels may change when polythetic analyses are performed. However, polythetic retinal neuron analysis in other species (Badea and Nathans, 2004) preserves neuron group as an intermediary level between neuron type and neuron class. Upper hierarchy levels are invariant in different classification schemas because, as discussed above, they were deduced from general retinal (neuron class level [Masland, 2001a]) and vertebrate CNS (category and division levels [Swanson, 2003; Swanson, 2004]) organization principles.

--> Super arbitrary. We should not go that way for cell types, taking the PhyloCode route is the most desirable way, IMO. 

The classification schema defined in Huxlin and Goodchild (Huxlin and Goodchild, 1997) is BAMS's Reference nomenclature for rat retinal ganglion cells because it uses the most morphological parameters and includes a comparison with previous nomenclatures.

The rat cerebellar cortex is associated with 15 neuron names defined in 6 nomenclatures (9 references), and is the second example of complete mapping in BAMS's Neuron ontology.

Complexities of the neuron classification problem, combined with the existence of alternate neuron nomenclatures for the same neural region or subsystem, make ontologies necessary tools for the explicit specification of concepts (Gruber, 1993) and for mapping or indexing between terms. Cell ontologies have been developed as components of larger bioinformatics (Gene Ontology Database [Ashburner and Lewis, 2002; Bard et al., 2005], DopaNet [Le Novère et al., 2004]) and anatomy ontologies (Rosse and Mejino, 2003), and other cell ontologies are available as well online (Cell Type: http://www.sanbi.ac.za/evoc/ontologies_html/latest/celltype.html; TissueDB: http://tissuedb.ontology.ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp: 8082/tissuedb/), but none are designed specifically for the nervous system.

--> Links also not working...

BAMS's Neuron ontology is an ontology designed specifically for representing domain knowledge in neurobiology. It is classed lightweight— it contains terms and relationships between them, but not yet axioms and formal constraints (Gómez-Pérez et al., 2003)

BAMS is the first online neuroinformatics system to include complete mapping of terminology used to describe the rat retina and cerebellar cortex.

The functional significance of the wiring diagram depends importantly, of course, on cell types in the body innervated by motor neurons and on stimuli sources for sensory neurons. Because of BAMS's general architecture, extension to non- neuronal cell types throughout the body is in principle trivial.

BAMS already links with other relevant web resources (Bota and Swanson, 2006) and it is accessible both in XML format, as part of the Swanson-98 brain nomenclature (http:// brancusi.usc.edu/bkms/xml/swanson-98.xml) and RDF/OWL format, which can be used for automated reasoning (http://esw.w3.org/topic/HCLS/ HCLSIG_DemoHomePage_HCLSIG_Demo)

--> Links are broken.

Fig. 2. Conceptual schema of classification criteria associated with “is-a” relations in BAMS's Neuron ontology
It already represents >100 variables used in the literature to classify neurons in Neuron nomenclatures.

Fig. 3. Neuron type hierarchies for seven rat gray matter regions Simple to complex examples all fit easily into the general schema provided in Figure 1c

--> Nice schema, but single-hierarchy and quite arbitrary. 

Fig. 4. Graphical display of rat retinal ganglion cell terms and relationships between terms (“the knowledge map”) in BAMS Neuron ontology


--> Good candidates for Wikidata items. 

# Comments

