
A guide to best practices for Gene Ontology (GO) manual annotation.
===================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q36997786]  
  
Publication date : 09 of July, 2013  

# Highlights


A fundamental application of the Gene Ontology (GO) is in thecreation of gene product annotations, evidence-based associations between GO definitions and experimental or sequence-based analysis. Currently, the GOC disseminates 126 million annotations covering>374 000 species including all the king-doms of life. 

As manual annotations are often used to propagate functional pre-dictions between related proteins within and between genomes, it is critical to provide accurate consistent manual anno-tations.

Thisguide represents the best practices for manual annotation as established by the GOC project over the past 12 years. Wehope this guide will encourage research communities to annotate gene products of their interest to enhance the corpus ofGO annotations available to all.


Although annotations are typically viewed as connec-tions between a gene product and a GO term, it is import-ant to stress that the GO term name is a surrogate for thedefinition, and that the biological concept described by thedefinition is really the core assertion being made by anannotation.


e annotation object or molecular entity are those definedby the Sequence Ontology [(13), http://www.sequenceontology.org]  and  includes  complex,  gene,  gene_product

Figure 1.GO Term ‘leukotriene-A4 hydrolase activity’ [GO:0004463], one of the terms mentioned in the main text of the article,as seen in AmiGO (16, http://amigo.geneontology.org). 

For example, Lin and Isaacson (15) studied axonalgrowth regulation by netrin and slit proteins usingboth mouse and rat cells. Two of the plasmids con-taining slit coding sequences were acknowledged asgifts and no reference to the species of origin wasprovided. In this case, to determine the species thesequences represent, the authors had to be contactedto confirm that the sequences actually originatedfrom human, neither mouse or rat.

--> That is really bad

 Although the similarity criteriarequired to make these annotations are defined by theannotating group, the GOC has established several rulesfor making these assignments. They are as follows:
 (i) Mandatory inclusion of a stable database identifierthat identifies the similar gene/gene product in the‘WITH/FROM’ field (column 8 inTable 3)
 (ii) The similar gene must be experimentally character-ized


 The GOChas setup several ways to handle new term requests and toevaluate existing terms. The easiest way is to contact the GOhelpdesk (go-helpdesk@geneontology.org or http://www.geneontology.org/GO.contacts.shtml) providing as muchdetail as possible.

 --> Way more laborious than creating a biological process on Wikidata...

Figure 2.GO Evidence code decision tree describing the process of choosing an evidence cod

--> Nice tree.

Deciding  between  a  Molecular  Function  and  aBiological Process term takes practice. The key questionto ask when selecting a Molecular Function term iswhether  the  experimental  results  show  ‘how’  thegene product accomplishes its role.

Biological Process describes biological goals accomplishedby one or more ordered assemblies of molecular functions.A biological process is not equivalent to a pathway.Specifically it does not represent any of the dynamics ordependencies that would be required to describe a path-way. Examples of broad Biological Process terms include‘metabolic process’, ‘signaling’ and ‘death.


, it is best tocapture that data with the specific terms rather thanannotating to a higher-level term. For example, theSaccharomyces cerevisiaegeneHSP12is annotated tospecific terms ‘cellular response to heat’ [GO:0034605],‘cellular response to osmotic stress’ [GO:0071470] and‘cellular response to oxidative stress’ [GO:0034599] (22)rather than the high level ‘cellular response to stress’[GO:0033554]. Grouping terms such as ‘cellular responseto stress’ are discouraged from use in direct annotationsbecause an experiment would typically not describe theresponse to a global stress, but would rather test theresponse to a specific type of stress.

--> Same logic applies for the technotype!  2.4.4. A pragmatic definition of cell type, more specifically, 2.4.4.2.4 The technotype

n annotation extension has two parts: an entity identi-fier for the object that is used to increase the specificity ofthe annotation (e.g. identifiers for a gene, gene product,GO term or a term from an external ontology such as a celltype or anatomy ontology), and a relation that connectsthe ‘primary’ GO term to the entity represented by theidentifier

The information captured in GO annotation ex-tensions encompasses several types of effector–targetrelationships Spatial aspects of processes or localizations, as in a spe-cific cell or tissue type as represented in the Cell TypeOntology  (24),  e.g.occurs_in[CL:0000182],  whereCL:0000182 identifies the cell type ‘hepatocyte


In addition to the evidence code that reflects the type ofexperiment leading to an annotation, the GOC providestwo ways to capture additional evidence information foran annotation: the qualifier and theWITH/FROMcolumn.A qualifier can be used to augment the interpretation ofthe GO term. Three qualifiers are available:colocalizes_with,contributes_toandNOT. These are found in theQUALIFIERcolumn of the GAF 2.0 format (Table 3

or examples of how GO annotations have been developedand how these guidelines have been put into practiceplease consult the following articles. The work on biofilmand filamentous growth inCandida(28), heart develop-ment (29), a case study of focused curation for renal andcardiovascular research (30) and in depth curation of theperoxisome proteome in humans (31) will be instructive forlearning about curation of the literature to create GOannotations.


The goal of the GOC is the unification of biology by creat-ing a nomenclature used for describing the functional char-acteristics of any gene product, protein or RNA, from anyorganism. 
# Comments

## Tags


1.3.1.1 Gene Ontology

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q36997786)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q36997786)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q36997786/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q36997786&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q36997786/P921%3BP4510)  
