
Dissecting the multicellular ecosystem of metastatic melanoma by single-cell RNA-seq
====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q37094024]  
  
Publication date : 01 of April, 2016  

# Highlights

To explore the distinct genotypic and phenotypic states of melanoma tumors, we appliedsingle-cell RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) to 4645 single cells isolated from 19 patients,profiling malignant, immune, stromal, and endothelial cells

which of these features may predict or explainclinical responses to anticancer agents. To explorethis question, we used single-cell RNA sequenc-ing (RNA-seq) to examine heterogeneities in ma-lignant and nonmalignant cell types and statesand to infer their possible drivers and interre-lationships in the complex tumor cellular ecosystem.

Clusters of nonmalignant cells were anno-tated as T cells, B cells, macrophages, endothelialcells, cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), andnatural killer cells on the basis of their preferen-tially or distinctively expressed marker genes (Fig.1D,fig.S2,andtablesS2andS3).

. Clusters of non-malignant cells [called by DBScan (17,19)] are marked by dashed ellipses andwere annotated as T cells, B cells, macrophages, CAFs, and endothelial (Endo.)cells from preferentially expressed genes (fig. S2 and tables S2 and S3). NK,natural killer cells

KDM5B and Ki67 staining (40× magnification) in correspondingtissue showing small clusters of KDM5B-high expressing cells negative for Ki67

In contrast,KDM5B(JARID1B)showedthe strongest association with noncycling cells(Fig. 2A, green dots), mirroring Patelet al.’sfind-ings in glioblastoma (15).KDM5Bencodes a H3K4histone demethylase associated with a subpop-ulation of slow-cycling and drug-resistant mel-anoma stemlike cells (21,22)inmousemodels.Immunofluorescence (IF) staining validated thepresence and mutually exclusive expression ofKDM5B and Ki67. KDM5B-expressing cells weregrouped in small clusters, consistent with ob-servations in mouse and in vitro models (21)(Fig. 2C and fig. S4E).



 Scoring genes by their correlation toMITFacross single cells, we identified a“MITF-high”program consisting ofMITFitself and severalMITF target genes, includingTYR,PMEL,andMLANA(table S7). 

 Various nonmalignant cells make up the tu-mor microenvironment. The composition of themicroenvironment has an important effect ontumorigenesis and also in the modulation oftreatment responses (1). Tumor infiltration withT cells, for example, is predictive for the responseto immune checkpoint inhibitors in various can-cer types (36).

 We identified the top preferentiallyexpressed genes in high-exhaustion cells com-pared with low-exhaustion cells (both definedrelative to the expression of cytotoxicity genes).This allowed us to define a core exhaustion sig-nature across cells from various tumors.

 
Our core exhaustion signature yielded 28genes that were consistently up-regulated inhigh-exhaustion cells of most tumors, includingcoinhibitory (TIGIT) and costimulatory (TNFRSF9/4-1BB and CD27) receptors (Fig. 5E and table S14).


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q37094024)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q37094024)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q37094024/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q37094024&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.AAD0501)  
