
Regulatory logic of neuronal diversity: terminal selector genes and selector motifs.
====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q37068535]  
  
Publication date : 22 of December, 2008  

# Highlights


Individual neuronal cell types are defined by the expression of unique batteries of terminal differentiation genes. The elucidation of the
cis-regulatory architecture of several distinct, single neuron type-specific gene batteries in Caenorhabditis elegans has revealed a
strikingly simple cis-regulatory logic, in which small cis-regulatory motifs are activated in postmitotic neurons by autoregulating
transcription factors (TFs). Loss of the TFs results in the loss of the identity of the individual neuron type. I propose to term these TFs
‘‘terminal selector genes’’ and their cognate cis-regulatory target sites ‘‘terminal selector motifs.’’ Terminal selector genes assign
individual neuronal identities by directly controlling the expression of downstream, terminal differentiation genes and act in specific
regulatory network configurations. The simplicity of the cis-regulatory logic on which the terminal selector gene concept is based may
contribute to the evolvability of neuronal diversity.


Such an approach is particularly
feasible in the experimentally easily
amenable and neuroanatomically well
characterized model organism Caenorhabditis elegans, which contains a nervous system of 302 neurons that fall into
118 anatomically precisely defined neuron classes (the term ‘‘neuron class’’ is
used here interchangeably with the term ‘‘neuron type,’’ which is more frequently
used in vertebrates) (2).

--> Maybe I should take a week to get all C. elegans neurons on Wikidata.

The ASE class of sensory neurons is
composed of two bilaterally symmetric
sensory neurons. Their transcriptome
was determined by SAGE analysis (4).
The analysis of the regulatory regions of
ASE-expressed genes, performed by reporter gene analysis in transgenic
worms, revealed a strikingly simple cisregulatory logic. ASE-expressed genes
contain in their proximity a small cisregulatory motif of 12 bp, called the
ASE motif (Table 1), which is absolutely
required as well as sufficient by itself to
drive gene expression in the ASE neurons (4).


s. Neuron-type specific gene batteries contain a common ‘‘tag’’ in the
form of a specific cis-regulatory motif,
and this motif is controlled by a TF (either a single factor or a combinatorially
acting TF complex) that specifies the
identity of the neuron. I propose to
term these TFs ‘‘terminal selector
genes.’’ This term represents an extension of the selector gene concept introduced by Garcia-Bellido (20) 30 years ago, which describes genes that are required to determine the identity of a specific developmental field or organ.

By terminal selector gene I mean to indicate
that the gene is not only required to
determine the identity of a specific neuron type but that it does so by directly
regulating the expression of terminal
differentiation genes [such terminal differentiation genes were coined ‘‘realizator’’ genes by Garcia-Bellido (20)].

Loss of
the terminal selector gene results in a
loss of the specific identity of the neuron type, without losing overall neuronal
identity, though, as pan-neuronal features still remain expressed in terminal
selector gene mutants.

s. Neuron classes, whose identity is controlled by
specific terminal selector genes, can often be subdivided into specific subclasses/subtypes. These subclasses essentially
represent a variation of a theme, as illustrated by the example of vertebrate
photoreceptors and the ASE gustatory
neurons in C. elegans

, genes may act as terminal selector genes in one cell type, but may
have no such function in other neuron
types in which they are expressed

The simplicity of terminal selector motifs
may mean that individual genes can be
rapidly recruited into or lost from a neuron type-specific gene battery through loss or gain of terminal selector motifs. Such
plasticity may provide a rich playground
for evolution. 

Finally, even though
I have discussed the terminal selector
gene concept in the context only of the
nervous system, it may apply to diversify
other cellular fates as well. For example,
the homeodomain TF Pax5 may serve as
a terminal selector gene for B cell fate
determination in the immune system (50).
# Comments
2.4 The concept of "cell type"
2.4.2. Modern perspectives of classification of cells
2.4.3. States, identities, fates, attractors and phenotypical continuity




## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q37068535)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q37068535)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q37068535/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Regulatory%20logic%20of%20neuronal%20diversity%3A%20terminal%20selector%20genes%20and%20selector%20motifs.'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
