
The evolution of cell types in animals: emerging principles from molecular studies.
===================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q37301036]  

# Highlights

How did the first cell types emerge and become distinct in animal evolution?

Homologous cell types between species (those cells that evolved from the same precursor cell type in the last common ancestor), and of related cell types within a given species, the socalled sister cell types.

Photoreceptors in humans and worms harbour orthologous opsins. Stripes of striated muscle
cells in various animals are composed of the same cytoskeletal proteins, which is indicative of homology.

Molecular fingerprints allows us to identify homologous cell types over long evolutionary distances and thereby reconstruct systems such as the urbilaterian brain, eyes and immune system. 

Homologous cell types conserved over long evolutionary distances tend to exert distinct cellular functions.

The precise order of branching in the typogenetic tree may still have to be refined at some positions, although the general degree of relatedness is well documented.

The aim of comparative study of cell type characteristics is to elucidate the evolutionary diversification of cell types (cell typogenesis) by detecting the similarities and differences between them.

Comparative genomics recently pinpointed some limitations of the cell type comparative approach revealing that important cell type-specific marker genes are often absent or strongly modified in fast-evolving species.

Homologous cell types between species implies that a similar precursor type existed in the last common ancestor of these species.

Molecular studies now allow hormone and neuropeptide-secreting cell types of the hypothalamus and pituitary to be tracked from vertebrates to protochordates, annelids and insects.

At least one type of blood cell already existed in urbilaterians.

Regarding the vertebrate immune system, a recent microarray survey revealed that many genes are specifically shared between B- and T-lymphocytes, supporting their status as sister cell types (as compared with other cell types of the vertebrate immune system),

Vertebrate retina harbours two separate sets of sister cell types that have diversified from an ancient rhabdomeric and ciliary photoreceptor precursor type, respectively.

Ancient cell types tend to have multiple functions, as outlined for the presumed macrophage-like haemocytes in the urbilaterian blood that

The vertebrate retina is a valuable case study for the segregation of functions between emerging sister cell types.

Teleost fishes possess more pigment cell types than any other group of vertebrates, indicating a link between cell type divergence and gene duplication.

The principle of cell type functional segregation elegantly explains the evolution of neuronal circuits and could therefore allow us to understand nervous system evolution. If we assume that emergent (functionally segregating) neuron types are likely to move apart from each other according to the specializations they acquire, and if we further assume that, at the same time, these cell types maintain cellular contact for functional coordination, the evolution of axonal and dendritic extensions interconnecting these cells would be triggered

Then the resulting typogenetic tree of homologous cell types is congruent between species, we will be able to infer the evolutionary history of cell type diversification for entire organ systems.

# Comments
"there are hundreds of human cell types"

Concept of a "typo genetic tree".

I like the retina as a model.

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q37301036)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q37301036)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q37301036/P921%3BP4510)  
