
Stem cell states, fates, and the rules of attraction.
=====================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q37475461]  

# Highlights

A key challenge is to understand how the different cell-fate options confronting stem and progenitor cells are selected and coordinated such that adoption of a given cell fate is coupled to appropriate regulation of the alternative pathways.

With roughly 30,000 genes in mammalian genomes, there are a staggering 230,000 potential combinations of gene expression values even if, for simplicity, we assume only ‘‘on’’ and ‘‘off’’ states for each gene.

it might yet appear difficult to understand how such a large repertoire of potential states can be constrained so that only a few hundred cell types that together comprise an organism are generated.

the cell states that are generated must not be unduly sensitive to small fluctu- ations in these signals (see Table 1 for a glossary of terms).
This requirement strongly limits the number of solutions or ‘‘states’’ for the system.

In terminally differentiated cells, transcriptional networks must be stable and irreversible, at least under homeostatic or physiological conditions.

From a metaphorical perspective, it is intuitive to think of cell states and state-transitions in the context of landscape models.

Attractor
The equilibrium solutions of the rate equations are called attractors, which represent observable cell phenotypes and can be visualized as wells, or depressions, in a landscape.

Basin of Attraction
The set of initial conditions of the rate equations that describe how a system moves to a particular attractor. Corresponds to the interior of the ‘‘rim’’ of a depression, based on the image of a ball rolling into a well, and also represents a particular cell state, such as a specific lineage, developmental stage, or a fate- primed subset of a given population

Currently, a landscape view also emerges from network biology in which cell fates are defined by stable states, known as attractors (Table 1), in which the expression of a large number of genes is stationary (Kauffman, 1967, 1993).

Effectively, an attractor would represent a particular cell state, which is defined by the constellation of genes that it expresses. Such cell states would correspond to the different cell types that we observe. However, the precise position of an individual cell within the attractor space may encode a degree of functional heterogeneity in that the cell can transition from one position to another without exit- ing from the attractor, or depression, within the landscape.

Cell states corresponding to very stable at- tractors would be impervious to changes in the environment (e.g., signaling molecules), so stem cells and progenitor cells would be expected to correspond to considerably less stable at- tractors than terminally differentiated cells.

GRNs provide a static view or snap shot of a cell state. However, knowledge of network architecture alone cannot describe the dynamics of these networks, which describe how gene expres- sion patterns change over time and, hence, ultimately map to cell fate during differentiation

The stable attractors correspond to the erythroid and myelomonocytic fates, but a metastable attractor was located between them, characterized by coexpression of both transcription factors and corresponding to the bipotent progenitor state (Huang et al., 2007; Chickarmane et al., 2009).

If one returns to the model that depicts cell types, or states, as stable attrac- tors in a landscape of gene expression space, then certain ques- tions immediately follow. For example, how does a cell transit from one attractor corresponding, for example, to cell type, or cell state, A, to another corresponding to cell type, or cell state, B?

E. coli cells appear to behave as if they are hedging their bets against future antibi- otic treatment by keeping a cell mixture of both quiescent and growing cells, since antibiotics act on the latter (Losick and Des- plan, 2008). In other words, external noise appears to be needed to sustain a mixed population that coexists with bistability. The

The concepts of attractors and the asso- ciated landscape pictures provide a useful conceptual frame- work in considering the nature of these substates and their relevance to cell differentiation.

The importance of pursuing computational models for pluripo-
tency and lineage-commitment issues in stem cell and progen- itor systems cannot be overemphasized. In addition to predicting dynamical behavior, such models will provide insight into switch and reprogramming properties and, very importantly, also reveal specific fluctuating behaviors. Not only are computational models useful for deriving GRN putative architectures and inter- actions, they can also pinpoint missing components and interac- tions from functionality requirements that can be confirmed in the laboratory (Chickarmane et al., 2009). Collectively, an itera- tive procedure emerges in which modeling will play a pivotal role in designing new experimental strategies. The computa- tional toolbox for this modern approach to scientific inquiry is already in place. All that remains is for the proper embedding of these approaches to be undertaken in existing experimental laboratories


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q37475461)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q37475461)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q37475461/P921%3BP4510)  
