
Transcriptomes of the major human pancreatic cell types.
========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q37430849]  
  
Publication date : 01 of September, 2011  

# Highlights

We sought to determine the mRNA transcriptome of all major human pancreatic endocrine and
exocrine cell subtypes, including human alpha, beta, duct
and acinar cells. In addition, we identified the cell typespecific distribution of transcription factors, signalling
ligands and their receptors.

The abundance of some
regulatory proteins was different from that reported in
mouse tissue. For example, v-maf musculoaponeurotic
fibrosarcoma oncogene homologue B (avian) (MAFB) was
detected at equal levels in adult human alpha and beta cells,
but is absent from adult mouse beta cells.

--> 2.4.4 difference between senso strictu and archetype

Here we used novel monoclonal antibodies to purify
populations of live human alpha, beta, duct and acinar cells
for a comprehensive study of their gene expression by
microarray and quantitative RT-PCR. 

Isolation of human pancreatic endocrine and exocrine
subpopulations To determine the gene expression profiles of
the major human pancreatic cell types, we used the collection of
cell surface-labelling monoclonal antibodies [22] listed in
ESM Table 2. 

 As shown in Fig. 1a–c, dual labelling with the
pan-islet marker HPi2 and the alpha cell marker HPa2
allowed separation of alpha (HPi2+
HPa2+) and beta(HPi2+HPa2−) cells


Figure 1d–g shows
cells from the same human islet sample sorted with this
exocrine marking combination; acinar (HPx1+), large duct(HPd1+HPd3+) and small duct (HPd1−HPd3+) populations
are indicated

--> Tag 2.4.2.1.

Figure 1l shows the
relative levels of mRNA encoding the prototypical cell type
markers insulin, glucagon, somatostatin, trypsin and
KRT19, as measured in the seven samples listed in ESM Table 1.

Although MAFB is often described as an
alpha cell marker in adult pancreatic tissue [12], several
exceptions have been observed. In the islets of adult
Meriones jirds (gerbils), MAFB is found in alpha and beta
cells [38]; even in mice, MAFB is detectable in the beta cells
of adolescents and pregnant adults [39]. Coupled with our
observation that MAFB is expressed in adult human beta
cells, this suggests that the pattern observed in adult mice is
the exception rather than the rule. 

--> 2.1.2. Species-specific genes and multispecies genes
--> 2.4.4.2. Names for different classes of types (Species-specific types and multispecies types)

t hormone regulation of duct cell
bicarbonate fluid secretion is physiologically important
[49]. However, the topographical association between islet
and duct cells in the pancreas implies that cell organisation
during epithelial branching morphogenesis and capillary
formation is important for pancreatic development. EPH
receptor–EFN signalling is important for regulating this
process during neural development and may play a similar
role during pancreatic tissue organisation

--> 1.4.4. Types of knowledge about cell types (emitted and received signals.)
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q37430849)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q37430849)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q37430849/P921%3BP4510)  
