
Biological knowledge management: the emerging role of the Semantic Web technologies.
====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q37490532]  

# Highlights
Thus, knowledge is data plus an interpretation of its meaning.

knowledge management (KM) is the process of systematically capturing, structuring, retaining and reusing information to develop an understanding of how a particular system (e.g. an organelle or a pathway) works, and subsequently to convey this information meaningfully to other information systems.

The schemas of different databases can be highly idiosyncratic, which makes it very difficult to interrogate multiple databases simultaneously.

The presentational layer should include a powerful and user-friendly interface to hide the implementation details from the user.A properly conceived Knowledge Representation (KR) has formalism is expected to:

- Represent real-world entities, both tangible (e.g. cell) and intangible (e.g. mitosis).

- Provide a set of decisions (commitments) about how and what to observe in a particular domain of discourse.

- Provide support for intelligent reasoning over the domain of discourse according to the needs of a particular community.

- Enable efficient organization and processing of information in a computational environment;

KR is enabled mainly by two essential elements:
- A language that can describe ideally all the facts to be modelled;
- Some modelling principles that provide a stan- dard or widely accepted formalizing rationale;

Gruber [21] proposed a definition most often used: ‘an ontology is an explicit specification of a conceptualization’.

Ontologies are necessary (if not sufficient) for resolving naming confusions, as they are designed to unambiguously represent things that are known.

The avalanche of data outpouring from the high-throughput genome-wide technologies caught life scientists unprepared.

The number of databases in the LS is outrageous compared to many other data-intensive disciplines like particle physics, and these databases are typically autonomous and disconnected [52]. Philosophical aspects (e.g. the partonomy paradoxes—partonomy refers to an ontological model built with ‘part of’ relations. This type of relation may have a variety of semantics so that their indiscriminate use may result in a paradox. 

A powerful integration of all available biological data and knowledge depends on an efficient information retrieval and management system to deal with numerous distributed resources [101] and one of the most promising proposed solutions is the use ofthe Semantic Web technologies


# Comments
