
Single-cell analysis of mixed-lineage states leading to a binary cell fate choice.
==================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q37510607]  
  
Publication date : 31 of August, 2016  

# Highlights

We used scRNA-Seq, coupled with a new analytic tool, ICGS and clonogenic assays to delineate hierarchical genomic and regulatory states culminating in neutrophil or macrophage specification.

It also revealed rare metastable intermediates that had collapsed the HSCP program and expressed low levels of the myeloid determinants, Irf8 and Gfi1.

O-Elite pathway enrichment assigned cellular identities to these states; HSCP-1 (Hematopoietic Stem Cell Progenitor), HSCP-2, Meg (Megakaryocytic), Eryth (Erythrocytic), Multi-Lin* (Multi-Lineage Primed), MDP (Monocyte-Dendritic cell precursor), Mono (Monocytic), Gran (Granulocytic) and Myelocyte (myelocytes and metamyelocytes).

Notably, the Multi-Lin* population co-expressed the transcription factors (TFs) Gata2, Meis1, PU.1 (Spi1) and C/EBPα, the latter two are key regulators of myelopoiesis.

The rare GG1 cells expressed intermediate levels of both transcription factors (Fig. 3g). The Gfi1-GFP reporter expresses a stable GFP, which can over-estimate Gfi1 expression, likely accounting for higher GFP expression in GG3s (Fig. 3f) in spite of very low levels of Gfi1 transcripts (Fig. 3g)

The concept of “trapping” of rare developmental intermediates by genetic perturbation is based on the analogy with trapping of unstable transition states in chemical reactions using physico-chemical strategies33. We propose that coincident expression of counteracting regulatory network components manifests as dynamic instability3This may generate oscillations in the regulatory states of multi- or bi-potential intermediates, resulting in bursts of alternate lineage gene expression

a, Colony appearance of CFU-G, -M and GM- respectively. Photos taken with a 10× objective
--> Nice, they do form colonies indeed.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q37510607)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q37510607)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q37510607/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q37510607&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/NATURE19348)  
