
Name-calling in the hippocampus (and beyond): coming to terms with neuron types and properties.
===============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q37656899]  

# Highlights

Widely spread naming inconsistencies in neuro- science pose a vexing obstacle to effective communication within and across areas of expertise. This problem is particularly acute when identifying neuron types and their properties. Hippocampome.org is a web-accessible neuroinformatics resource that organizes existing data about essential properties of all known neuron types in the rodent hippocampal formation.

Mining this knowledge from peer-reviewed reports reveals the troubling extent of ter- minological ambiguity and undefined terms. Examples span simple cases of using multiple synonyms and acronyms for the same molecular biomarkers (or other property) to more complex cases of neuronal naming.

a new functionality of Hippocampome.org: a fully searchable, curated catalog of human and machine-readable definitions, each linked to the corresponding neuron and property terms.

--> Site is up and running. Not super user-friendly, and made for non-programatic access, but interesting.

The often subjective and arbitrary naming of neurons led to a cluttered literature landscape in which breakdowns in communication can hinder the understanding of the struc- ture and function of the brain. A comprehensive solution would require establishing a broadly applicable and widely accepted classification scheme defining neuron types based on their properties.

We have previously proposed an ontological approach
to defining neurons based on necessary and sufficient part- relation-value triple-store techniques [7]

A recent empirical assessment of inter-investigator
agreement on morphological classes of neocortical interneurons demonstrated a variable level of consensus across neuron types and properties [10]

In this framework, a neuron type is initially identified by
its (putative) neurotransmitter and the presence of axons and dendrites in the distinct layers of dentate gyrus, CA3, CA2, CA1, subiculum, and entorhinal cortex.

Second, we introduce a newly deployed functionality that maps all relevant property terms to corresponding concepts, linking their occurrence in the published evidence to community-accepted definition.

The nomenclatures of neuron types and of their features are both vexed with ambiguities, resulting in a ‘‘many-to- many’’ mapping between neurons and names as well as inconsistent definitions of properties.

When neurons are described in a publication, they are typically named in isolation, out of context with respect to the rest of the brain circuit and the literature. Sometimes neuron types or individual neurons are indicated solely by a non-descriptive label (e.g., ‘‘Type I’’ cells [12] or ‘‘cell #7’’ [13], and occasionally they are not named at all.

We should note that these are not exceptional instances, but absolutely frequent occurrences, as depicted by several additional examples in Fig. 1 [20–29].

--> Nice assessment of relationships, with valuable examples.

Plainly, the use of identical or similar names for terms with different electrophysiological meanings can lead to the propagation of confusion and, worse, incorrect interpretations of data that are incorporated into the literature moving forward.

It is yet to be seen how widely used either of these schemata will be. Alas, even if the entire research community compactly embraced them today, the problem of linking new information with previous publications would remain.

Converting information published for human consumption into machine-readable form dictates system level decisions to minimize the energy cost of processing. We chose a three-step workflow. The first step is for researchers (doctoral students, postdocs, and faculty) to identify and study relevant articles, gleaning salient information and encoding it into spreadsheets. The second step involves python code to ingest these spreadsheets into data tables, populating along the way relation tables. The third step consists of rendering the resulting structured data in web pages dynamically leveraging the database.

--> Oh man, nanopubs could play a beautiful role here.

side-out’’ and ‘‘sheetlike.’’ Lastly we hand-curated the remaining set of approximately 700 terms to remove non- scientifically relevant words yielding a final corpus of 490 evidence-derived terms

The classification schema introduced by Hippocam- pome.org [11] defines neuron types based on their properties, starting from morphological patterns and with the added specification of molecular and electrophysio- logical features. For example, Hippocampome.org defines dentate gyrus granule cells as excitatory neurons with axons in the hilus, CA3 lucidum/pyramidale, and CA2 pyramidale, dendrites in the inner and outer molecular layer, and soma in the granular layer. These definitions are now available as an explicit list (hippocampome.org/ neuron-types) and linked from the term definition portal described above.

We constrain the number of Hippocampome.org [11] neuron types (e.g., 122 in the initial release) by limiting the primary characterization properties to axonal/dendritic patterns and excitatory/inhibitory neurotransmitters.

The formal name contains several components (hip- pocampome.org/formal-name): (a) the abbreviation of the subregion where the soma is located, (b) a symbol speci- fying the putative major neurotransmitter (i.e., ‘‘e’’ for glutamatergic, excitatory neurons or ‘‘i’’ for GABAergic, inhibitory neurons), and (c) a numeric encoding for the presence or absence of neurites within the subregion of soma location. In neuron types whose axons extend outside of their home subregion, the numerical encoding continues with a ‘‘p’’ (for projecting) followed by codes analogous to (a) and (c) to specify the subregions receiving the projection.

If one name or acronym is clearly dominant, with more
frequent citations than all other names, we adopt it as the common name, as in the cases of HIPP, MOPP, HICAP, and MOLAX interneurons.

Paraphrasing Shakespeare: ‘‘What’s in a name? That which we call a [neuron] by any other name would [fire] as [frequently].’’

--> That made me laugh, well done, authors :) 

There have not been any all-inclusive compilations of neuron types within the entire rodent hippocampal formation based on peer- reviewed published literature for the past two decades
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q37656899)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q37656899)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q37656899/P921%3BP4510)  
