
Toward a conceptual framework for biology.
==========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q37797379]  
  
Publication date : 01 of September, 2010  

# Highlights

Science progresses faster when researchers operate within an explicit framework of concepts andtheories, but currently biology has no explicit, overarching conceptual framework and few general theories.

 In this paper, using the theory of evolution as an exemplar, I discuss the nature oftheory in biology and put forth an overarching theory, as well as new general theories for cells,organisms, and genetics. Along with the theories of evolution and ecology, these constitute a generalconceptual framework for the biological sciences

. This framework can also be used as a teachingtool, moving the teaching of biology beyond the transference of a vast compendium of facts

Conceptual  frameworks  always  exist—science  isnever  atheoretic  (Suppe  1977)— but  oftenthe theories within those frameworks are notwell-articulated or explicit. Theory is impor-tant because it clarifies thinking.

The purpose of this pa-per  is  to  lay  out  a  series  of  theories  thatencompass  all  of  biology:  an  overarchingtheory and five general theories. In doingso,  I  will  take  Dobzhansky’s  (1964)  apho-rism  that  nothing  in  biology  makes  senseexcept in the light of evolution and dem-onstrate that the complement is also true.

ith  that  as  an  exem-plar,  I  will  present  a  hierarchical  structurefor theories. I will then outline the overarch-ing theory and the other four general theo-ries.

This formulation of a theory as a set ofstatements consisting of concepts and con-firmed  generalization  is  in  line  with  howmany  philosophers  view  theories  (vanFraassen  1980;  Giere  1988;  Beatty  1997;Longino 2002; Pickett et al. 2007; Wimsatt2007; del Rio 2008; NRC 2008).

he  past  50  years  have  seen  additionaldebates  over  those  mechanisms  and  themeaning of the concepts embodied in thefundamental  principles.  Those  debateshave been many; I touch on just a few hereto illustrate the process of theory change.Gradualism  (Table  1,  principle  4)  in  thenineteenth  century  clearly  referred  to  avery  slow  process—“Natura  non  facit  sal-tum [nature does not make a leap]”(Dar-win  1859:471).  We  now  recognizethat natural  selection  can  result  in  substantialchange  in  tens  of  generations.

Onerecent example is the theory of punctuatedequilibrium,  which,  in  its  original  version(Eldredge and Gould 1972), claimed thatall evolutionary change occurred in a sin-gle generation associated with the processof speciation, although this extreme positionwas  later  softened  (Gould  and  Eldredge1977, 1993).

As  described  in  Table  1,  the  theory  ofevolution provides several clues about thestructure of theory. All of the fundamentalprinciples are broad generalizations aboutevolutionary  patterns  and  processes,  andwhole subdisciplines are contained withina  single  principle.  The  principles  are  notdirectly predictive statements, at least notin a quantitative sense. That is the role ofsubsidiary theories and models.


in  the  example  presented  above,  thetheory  of  evolution  is  the  general  theory,the theory of natural selection is a consti-tutive  theory  within  that  general  theory,and  the  breeder’s  equation  is  a  specificmodel  derived  from  that  constitutive  the-ory.  This  view  of  theories  as  families  ofsubtheories,  including  models,  is  consis-tent with how theories are treated across allof  biology  and  in  other  sciences  as  well.

Rather,  the  frame-work  will  often  stretch  continuously  fromthe general to the specific.

When asked to describe a theory, we of-ten list a set of broad statements describingempirical  patterns  and  processes  that  op-erate within a domain, as we saw with thetheory  of  evolution.  These  broad  state-ments form a set of fundamental principlesconsisting of concepts and confirmed gen-eralizations  (see  Table  3  for  definitions).Fundamental  principles  are  meant  to  bebroad in scope, often encompassing multi-ple interrelated patterns and mechanisms.
Laws, in contrast, reside within constitutive theories. They are not part of the gen-eral theories of biology, because no singlelaw is ever required for the construction ofall  models  within  the  domain  of  a  giventheory.  A  brisk  debate  has  occurred  overwhether  biology  even  has  any  laws  (e.g.,Beatty 1997; Brandon 1997; Mitchell 1997;Sober 1997; Fox Keller 2007), and the con-tinuing  search  for  such  laws  is  an  impor-tant impetus of theory change.

Theories play three roles (R. Creath, unpublished research). First, theories serve asgeneralizations  that  go  beyond  the  scopeof the specific data upon which those gen-eralizations  are  based.  Second,  theoriesprovide concepts that go beyond what canbe expressed in observational terms. Bothof  these  roles  involve  theories  as  descrip-tors of the world. Third, theories provide aframework   for   guiding   and   evaluatingresearch—what Kuhn (1962) called a “par-adigm”  and  Laudan  (1977)  called  a  “re-search  tradition.”  The  theories  presentedin this paper play all of these roles.

First,  ageneral theory must potentially apply to allspecies.

Second, a fundamental principle must ap-ply to all or most of the constitutive theorieswithin  the  domain  of  the  general  theory.

Third, the first fundamental principle of atheory should encompass the basic object ofinterest

Fourth, a fundamental principle must po-tentially be up for falsification within the domain of consideration

--> Interesting. So what really determines the domain of consideration, if not the principles?

Fifth, the set of fundamental principles ofa subsidiary theory should not simply repeatthose of a more general theory, but must beconsequences of them for that particular do-main.  

Sixth, the number of fundamental princi-ples  should  be  as  few  as  necessary,  but  nofewer.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q37797379)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q37797379)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q37797379/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q37797379&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1086/655117)  
