
Best Practices in Manual Annotation with the Gene Ontology.
===========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38440697]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2017  

# Highlights

We describe the current best practices for high-quality literature curation and how GO curators succeed in modeling biology using a relatively simple framework. We also highlight a number of diffi culties when translating experimental assays into GO annotations.

 Manual annotation with GO involves biocurators, who  are  trained  to  reading,  extracting,  and  translating  experi-mental fi ndings from publications into GO terms.

Here, we present guidelines and recommendations for best prac-tices in manual annotation, to help curators avoid the most com-mon pitfalls.

The ontology is divided into three branches, or aspects: Molecular Function (MF) that cap-tures  the  biochemical  or  molecular  activity  of  the  gene  product;  Biological  Process  (BP),  corresponding  to  the  wider  biological  module  in  which  the  gene  product’s  MF  acts;  and  Cellular  Component  (CC),  which  is  the  specifi  c  cellular  localization  in  which the gene product is active. 

The complexity of biology is refl ected in the GO: with 40,000 different  terms  [4],  learning  to  use  the  GO  can  be  compared  to  learning a new language.

FOXL2 (UniProtKB P58012) transcription factor has a posi-tive effect on the occurrence of apoptosis, by an unknown mecha-nism, so it is annotated to “positive regulation of apoptotic process” (GO:0043065).  This  is  where  the  curator’s  knowledge  is  critical  and  provides  most  added  value  over,  e.g.,  machine  learning  and  text mining


With more than 500,000 records indexed yearly in PubMed, it is not possible for the GO to comprehensively represent all the avail-able data on every protein.

On  the  other  hand,  without  the  broader  context  of  the  research  domain, some papers may be misleading: fi rst, as more data accu-mulate,  a  growing  number  of  contradictory  or  even  incorrect  results are found in the scientifi c literature.

hile it would be tempting to conclude    that    the    protein    has    “protein    kinase    activity”    (GO:0004672)  from  the  presence  of  the  protein  kinase  domain,  the  more  general  term  “kinase  activity”  (GO:0016301)  with  no  specifi  cation  of  the  potential  substrate  class  (lipid  or  protein)  is  more appropriate

Thus, the annotation of  enzymes  that  modify  histone  tails  is  limited  to  the  primary  function   of   the   enzyme   (“ubiquitin-protein   ligase   activity”   (GO:0004842) and “histone H2B ubiquitination” (GO:0033523), in this case), while the further histone modifi cations are only anno-tated to the proteins mediating these modifi cations.

While  hydroxylation  of  phylloquinone and MK-4 probably constitutes the main activity of this enzyme since this activity has been confi rmed by several in vivo assays,  CYP4F2  also  shows  activity  towards  other  related  sub-strates,  such  as  arachidonic  acid  omega  and  leukotriene-B  [  10] omega [ 17– 21]. Clearly vitamin K1 and MK-4 are the main physi-ological  substrates  of  CYP4F2,  but  since  it  is  plausible  that  the  enzyme also acts on other molecules, these different activities are also  annotated. 

  Fig.  3    Number of annotations in 12 species annotated by the GO consortium. Source:   http://geneontology.org/page/current-go-statistics  

  Annotate the conclusion of the experiment. Keep in mind that this may be different from the results presented. Be especially careful of interpreting the function of proteins based on mutant phenotypes.

To continue having an acceptable throughput, manual curation should be able to cope with the increasing corpus of scientifi c data. From this perspective, PAINT  constitutes  an  excellent  example  of  a    propagation  tool  based on experimental GO annotations, which ensures maximum consistency and effi ciency without compromising the quality of the annotations  produced.  Such  system  provides  one  possible  answer  to the concerns addressed on scalability of expert curation. 


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38440697)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38440697)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q38440697/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q38440697&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-3743-1_4)  
