
The EXACT description of biomedical protocols.
==============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38513299]  
  
Publication date : 01 of July, 2008  

# Highlights
Results: We have developed the Experiment ACTions (EXACT)
ontology as the basis of a method of representing biological
laboratory protocols. We provide example protocols that have been
formalized using EXACT, and demonstrate the advantages and
opportunities created by using this formalization. We argue that the
use of EXACT will result in the publication of protocols with increased
clarity and usefulness to the scientific community.
Availability: The ontology, examples and code can be download

‘Everything is vague to a degree you do not realize till you have
tried to make it precise.’
Bertrand Russell

--> That is the leading quote of my thesis. Damn, thank you. 


An optimization period is then necessary to bridge the
gap in knowledge between the published protocol and one which
works reliably. Knowledge of how best to implement an existing
method is regarded as a group’s intellectual property and is often
not included in published manuscripts. Each and every time research
results are published with insufficient information in the materials
and methods section this duplication of labour is repeated, adding
to inconvenience and cost

--> So true

The protocol is summarized in point form using natural language.
This can lead to ambiguous statements with unclear objectives.
Point 1: does the word inoculate mean using a single yeast colony
from a solid media plate or can the liquid YPAD (Yeast extract,
Peptone, Adenine hemisulfate, Dextrose) be inoculated from another
previously inoculated YPAD liquid culture? The statement incubate
with shaking, is this at 20 rpm or 400 rpm? Does overnight mean
12 or 24 h?

The target audience of
this protocol are yeast biologists and therefore the author assumes
that the reader has a degree of prior knowledge. However, this is not
always the case. A researcher new to this field may mis-interpret a
statement resulting in an inaccurate objective. 

In EXACT we first provide a vocabulary and ontology, and then
begin to look at the grammatical aspects of describing experiment
actions.


To develop EXACT, we first analysed protocols from several biomedical domains, including functional genomics, metabolomics and
drug screening, as well as protocols published in Nature Protocols7.
We then consulted with biologists, microbiologists, biochemists and
chemists with experience in the execution of these protocols to
clarify ambiguous statements and to enrich the protocols with as
much information as possible. This helped to capture the precise
meaning of each experiment action performed. General concepts
were abstracted from these experiments actions and were used
to develop the ontological classes. The scientific experts then
used these classes to try and represent their own protocols. After
many painstaking rounds of consultation, classes were added and
removed or changed in the ontology to help better represent the
actions performed in various protocols. The EXACT hierarchy of
experiments is sufficient to formalize many of the protocols used in
our labs. However, as we formalize more and more protocols using
EXACT, its class structure will grow and evolve to meet the needs
of new methods and techniques.

--> Cool developing system, and cool meta-description of how the knowledge from the community was fed into the system. 

EXACT is available in two versions: EXACT/EXPO is compliant
with EXPO (Soldatova and King, 2006) and more suitable for
automated laboratories; EXACT/OBI is more suitable for using
within OBO communities. EXACT/OBI provides an explicit
mapping to OBI (the current draft March, 2008).
The principal difference between these two versions is in
philosophical foundations. OBO ontologies are based on a
philosophy of reality and do not include abstract entities. This
does not put considerable restrictions on the description of the
existing protocols as most protocols are designed for execution
of experiments in the real physical world by manipulating real
physical objects. The results of our research show (King et al.,
2004; Soldatova et al., 2006; Whelan and King, 2008) that
the representation of logical and mathematical objects (i.e. sets,
relations, facts) and other entities within a computer system as
abstract entities provides a clearer description of computational
experiments and experiments executed in automated laboratories.
Philosophers have argued about fundamental ontological
questions for at least two and a half thousand years, and we do
not wish to enter these debates. What we need to do is to make
practical decisions about how best to describe protocols. We believe
that supplying different versions of EXACT is the best way to deal
with conflicting upper ontologies. Hopefully the two versions of
EXACT can be merged when a philosophical solution is found that
is suitable for all needs


-->        1.2.1. Descriptional logic and its historical context


Good tools are vital to the adoption of standards. If we expect
biomedical scientists to unambiguously define their protocols we
must give them tools that are easy to use



This careless/vague description of experiment protocols was
perhaps viable when molecular biology focused on qualitative
experiments: the correct result being indicated by a band on a
gel in the correct place, a colony growing, etc. Such experiments
were routinely executed in batches of 10 or 20. However, with
the ever increasing importance of quantitative methods such as
microarrays (where numerical values have to be interpreted as
biological observations and tens of thousands of experiments are
executed simultaneously) the precise and unambiguous description
of experiment protocols is essential.

-->    1.3. Knowledge Representation in biology


relationship of our work to process algebras.
It is intrinsically valuable to describe one’s own experiments
in a precise and unambiguous way as it provides a clear record
of what one has achieved. However, the value of describing
protocols clearly is greatly amplified by being able to exchange
and compare protocols. Ontologies provide a basis for such a
shared understanding. We therefore envisage developing an EXACT
repository as a place where investigators and practitioners can
accumulate their knowledge about representing protocol actions. We
invite researchers from all areas to participate in the development
of an ontology of experiment actions and to contribute to an Open
Source project for the formalized representation of protocols
# Comments


## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38513299)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38513299)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q38513299/P921%3BP4510)  
