
Ontologies: Formalising biological knowledge for bioinformatics.
================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38522811]  

# Highlights

This article considers the produc- tion, formulation and types of bio-ontologies together with the reasons why they are so useful.

For bioinformaticians, however, today’s choice is likely to be ontology*(* ¼ reference to website list), an arcane word that, in its original philosophical context, means the study of knowledge or being.

--> Lol, things have changed in the past 20y

Ontologies are widely used in informatics, and are now becoming important in bioinformatics as they can articulate and make generally accessible in a structured way the large amounts of hard-won biological knowledge normally stored in textbooks and research papers. Once ontologised, this knowledge can be linked to databases and used for searching their contents.

Because ontologies can be directly linked to the data in data- bases, searches using ontologies are much faster and less subject to ambiguity than string searches (these match text defined by a user to text within the database and are, for example, the basis of a search in OMIM*).

The point about structure is central. The major importance of ontologies is that they are computer-interpretable, and this means that the knowledge items have to be linked through formal rules. Such rules can be interpreted logically, but they can also be represented pictorially either by a hierarchy, where items have a single parent, or a graph


GOBO*—the ontology website Access to the main bio-ontologies is through the GOBO* website (Global Open Biological Ontologies) where about a dozen ontologies are now stored. Acceptance on the GOBO site implies that the ontology is in OWL or an equivalent format and that all the ontologyentities haveauniqueID. It alsomeans that the ontology has been accepted as authoritative by the GOBO group, and this usually means that it has been assembled by a group seen by its own field as authorita- tive—making ontologies is very much a communal activity involving both biological experts and bioinformaticians.

There are three basic ways to handle this morass of output data. The first is to grind through it wasting a lot of time; the second is to put the response through a filter, but these can be hard to program and risk being over-specific; the third and best is to use our existing knowledge formalised in ontologies to refine the question so that we get the answer we want (with perhaps a few false positives). Even better, we will be able to use the unique IDs of ontologies to query several databases simul- taneously with a higher precision than has hitherto been possible.

--> Oh gosh, 20 years! This has been the gold standard for 20 years!

However, as biologists come to realise that making an
ontology is really no more than expressing in a pellucidly clear and formal way the knowledge gleaned by past generations of experimentalists, they will realise how necessary it is to rearticulate this knowledge in a contemporary format. We can therefore expect to see posted on the GOBO* site, in the not too distant future, ontologies of cell biology, evolutional taxonomy, biodiversity, immunology and almost every biological topic that has a reference book.


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38522811)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38522811)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q38522811/P921%3BP4510)  
