
Are the current ontologies in biology good ontologies?
======================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38519864]  
  
Publication date : 01 of September, 2005  

# Highlights

Progress will still need to be driven by the logic of genetics and by further increases in abstraction.”Edward B. Lewis, Nobel lecture

The failure of many bio-ontologies to follow international standards for ontology design and description is hampering their application and threatens to restrict their future use.

The  research  histories  of  both  biology  and  ontologies  originate  with  the  philosopher  Aristotle. 

This lack of awareness is reflected in the fact that many, perhaps all, ‘bio-ontologies’ fail to follow international 


This  means  that  many  of  the  steps  in  designing  an  ontology  remain manual and a kind of ‘art’3. An ontol-ogy  consists  of  four  main  components:  con-cepts (or classes), a hierarchical structure (is-arelations, a backbone of an ontology), relations (other than is-a relations), and axioms. Riichiro Mizoguchi4, one of the leaders of ontological engineering, lists fundamental ideas of a class, an instance and is-a relations in ontology:

Intrinsic  property.
The  intrinsic  property  of a thing is a property that is essential to the thing, which loses its identity when the prop-erty changes.

The ontological definition of a class.
X is a class if and only if (iff ) each element x of X satisfies the intrinsic property of X. If and only if (iff ) this definition holds then the relation <x instance-of X> is tru

Is-a  relation
class  A  is-a  class  >  relation  holds between classes if and only if (iff ) every instance  of  the  class  A  is  also  an  instance  of  the class B.
--> Bad naming, "subclassOf is much more precise. 

The  intersection  between  the  ontologies  listed  at  http://suo.ieee.org/SUO/Ontology-refs.html and  those  in  the  open  biological  ontologies  repository (http://obo.sourceforge.net/cgi-bin/table.cgi) is the empty set.

The  boundaries between MIAME concepts...and the  MGED  ontology  (that  try  to  define  and  structure the MIAME concepts) is neither well defined  nor  easy  to  understand
  What  are  the  reasons  for  MGED  incompleteness  and  incomprehensibility? Below we list some of the problems with the MGED constraint design


      MGED   does   not   properly   distinguish   between a class and an individual. Why are <absolute>, <ORF> and <RNA> considered individuals and not classes? Some concepts, such as <Atmosphere>, are considered to be both a class and an individual. This may be necessary in some circumstances, but it seri-ously complicates the reasoning process.

    --> General problem...

Expert biologists may be able to deal with poorly designed and inconsistent ontologies, but this not cur-rently  possible  for  computer  programs  that  do machine learning or text mining. As such programs are set to dominate the analysis and retrieval of biological data, we argue that bio-logical ontologies should be designed for their needs as well.    

In  this  context,  new  biological  ontologies  should avoid the types of mistakes shown by MGED and follow instead unified standards and  design  methodologies.

We argue that ongoing efforts to develop bio-ontologies need to adopt these rules. Anything less  will  likely  prevent  them  from  fulfilling  their great potential in biology.

--> Perharps too harsh.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38519864)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38519864)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q38519864/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q38519864&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/NBT0905-1095)  
