
How Single-Cell Genomics Is Changing Evolutionary and Developmental Biology.
============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38622289]  

# Highlights 

In scRNA-seq, information about a cell’s location within the cell type under study is not normally available. 

One challenge in the comparison of cellular transcriptomes between species is to establish the precise orthology and paralogy relationships of all expressed genes at a large scale.

Depicting fate restriction rather than descent, the Waddington epigenetic landscape differs from the kinship lineage, which considers direct, cell to daughter relations. Divisions can occur without restriction of cell fates. cell fate restrictions can occur without division.

Waddington lineages have been  used to redefine the hematopoietic lineage tree. In yolk-rich insects in which the entire cleavage program was replaced by instantaneous cellularization, which challenges the notion of kinship lineage to these animals. 

Evolutionary changes at one cell level  propagate downstream lineage levels. Ex: the evolution of stem cell types appears to be linked to the evolution of the cell types that they produce (Arendt et al. 2016).

Pluripotency TFs known from mammals such as Nanog or Sox2 do not exist in basal metazoans , and there appears to be no conserved set of transcription factors involved in stem cell maintenance. 

From an evolutionary viewpoint, a new cell type identity is established by a novel and unique combination of transcription factors, which are referred to as terminal selectors.

Dopaminergic neurons and the glutamatergic neurons of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) are different, but share similar signatures. Thus, these neurons likely represent sister cell types.

# Comments

One critical challenge in the comparison of cellular transcriptomes between species is to establish the precise orthology and paralogy
--> This limits definitions of cell types for more than one species. 

Disagree with the developmental tree, as it is strictly not a tree; transdifferentiation exists for example, and there are overlapping types.

Very good article, strong evolutionary perspective.

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38622289)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38622289)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q38622289/P921%3BP4510)  
