
Revealing the vectors of cellular identity with single-cell genomics.
=====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q39002947]  

# Highlights

Emerging computational analysis methods, especially in single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), have already begun to reveal, in a data-driven way, the diverse simultaneous facets of a cell’s identity, from discrete cell types to continuous dynamic transitions and spatial locations. These developments will eventually allow a cell to be represented as a superposition of ‘basis vectors’, each determining a different (but possibly dependent) aspect of cellular organization and function.

To understand a cell—the basic unit of life—we must determine the multiple factors that shape its identity. These include its position in a taxonomy of cell types, the progress of multiple time-dependent processes that take place simultaneously, the cell’s response to signals from its local environment, and the precise location and neighborhood in which it resides.

By decomposing this profile to its separate components, it should be possible to determine, in a data-driven way, the specific physiological and molecular features of each of these factors, without relying on prior definitions, hypotheses, or markers.

Second, construction of a comprehensive atlas of all human cell types and sub-types—including their activity states, dynamic transitions, physical locations, and lineage relationships through development—has become a tangible goal.

We highlight key current methods that can characterize the diverse factors involved in determining cellular identity, including cell type (with cell types forming a hierarchical taxonomy), continuous phenotypes, temporal progression (on linear, bifurcating, or cyclic trajectories), and spatial position in the tissue

We define a cell’s identity as the outcome of the instantaneous intersection of all factors that affect it.

We refer to the more permanent aspects in a cell’s identity as its type (e.g., a hepatocyte typically cannot turn into a neuron) and to the more transient elements as its state. 

Cell types are often organized in a hierarchical taxonomy, as types may be further divided into finer subtypes; such taxonomies are often related to a cell fate map, reflecting key steps in differentiation.

Cell states arise transiently during time-dependent processes, either in a temporal progression that is unidirectional (e.g., during differentiation, or following an environmental stimulus) or in a state vacillation that is not necessarily unidirectional and in which the cell may return to the origin state.

Vacillating processes can be oscillatory (e.g., cell-cycle or circadian rhythm) or can transition between states with no predefined order (e.g., due to stochastic, or environmentally controlled, molecular events). 

These time-dependent processes may occur transiently within a stable cell type (as in a transient environmental response), or may lead to a new, distinct type (as in differentiation). 

A cell’s identity is also affected by its spatial context, which includes the cell’s absolute location, defined as its position in the tissue (e.g., the location of a cell along the dorsal–ventral axis during embryo development determines its exposure to a morphogen gradient), and the cell’s neighborhood, or the identity of neighboring cells.

The cell’s identity is manifested in its molecular contents. 

Genomic experiments measure these in molecular profiles, and computational methods infer information on the cell’s identity from the measured molecular profiles. We refer to this as inferring facets of the cell’s identity, or inferring factors that created the cell’s identity, to stress that none describes it fully, but each is an important, distinguishable aspect.

By analogy, we relate the biological factors that shape a cell’s identity to basis vectors that span a space of cell identities.

In particular, basis vectors in algebra are defined to be independent of each other, but facets of a cell’s identity that we would like to distinguish and identify separately—such as its type, location, and state—may be largely dependent on one another. For example, the spatial position of a cell in a solid organ is a fixed element of its identity that is usually distinguished from its ‘type’ but is nevertheless not independent of cell type.

Even within a type, cells may span a continuous range of functional phenotypes (T cells of a single type, but with a range of inflammatory versus regulatory phenotypes). While each such facet of a cell’s identity is often considered separately, they are at least partly interdependent.
Cataloging sources of biological variation, and understanding how they combine to determine a cell’s identity, is an integral task in the compilation of a human cell atlas. This will reopen definitions of a cell’s type and will allow a more sophisticated view of a cell, not only as an instance of a predefined type, but rather as the sum of the biological factors that shaped it.

Classification of cells into discrete types from single-cell profiles is a problem of unsupervised clustering in high dimensions. The key, inter-related challenges include 
- adapting methods to the exponentially increasing scale of single-cell data;
- ensuring that the resulting classification is reproducible across experiments and platforms; 
- finding the proper granularity and detecting hierarchies of types and subtypes where they exist, especially when cell type frequency varies by multiple orders of magnitude from the most abundant to the rarest sub-type; 
- distilling molecular markers and signatures to characterize each cell type and/or cluster; 
- matching the resulting classes to legacy knowledge, and using semi-supervised methods where such knowledge exists; and 
- visualizing, sharing, and comparing classifications. 

Solutions to many of these challenges are only beginning to emerge.

Categorization of cells into discrete types is a powerful abstraction and has been the focus of much of the single-cell genomic research thus far.

Finally, even when a cell population partitions into discrete types, hybrid cells—single cells that are a mix of two or more types—may be observed (we refer here to true biological hybrids, in contrast to false hybrids resulting from doublets)

By combining single-cell tissue genomics with computational models for circuits that relate cells to each other in space and time, from their molecular connections and up to their functional impacts, we can build an integrated understanding of how cells fulfill their function in health and disease.


# Comments

"This will reopen definitions of a cell’s type and will allow a more sophisticated view of a cell, not only as an instance of a predefined type, but rather as the sum of the biological factors that shaped it."
--> Amazing!

 
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q39002947)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q39002947)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q39002947/P921%3BP4510)  
