
Categorization of services for seeking information in biomedical literature: a typology for improvement of practice.
====================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q40065967]  
  
Publication date : 26 of July, 2008  

# Highlights

We have examined existing
web-based services for information retrieval in order to give users guidance to improve their everyday practice of
literature analysis.We propose two dimensions along which the services may be categorized: categories of input and
output formats; and categories of behavioural usage. The categorization would be helpful for biologists to understand the differences in the input and output formats and the tasks they fulfil in information-retrieval activities.
Also, they may inspire future bioinformaticians to further innovative development in this field.


Among them, biologists would be most familiar with
search engines, whose primary goal is to retrieve
and rank relevant documents, so-called document
retrieval. Information retrieval is often regarded as
identical to document retrieval, but this description is
too restrictive


Input format
Users of an information-retrieval tool have to specify
their query in textual form. The text may be short
(e.g. a single word, a database entry identifier) or
very long (e.g. a complete document) and may
require a rather complex format unsuitable to
persons with little computational experience (e.g.
Boolean queries).

--> No ontology-aware queries


We adopt a model of information-seeking behaviour
[6, 7] to characterize the tools in question with
respect to their applicability to different behavioural
activities.


Starting comprises all activities that are generic to
the initial retrieval of information to obtain an
overview of a topic, or to locate key elements of
he topic, from the literature. During this phase, the
information-seeking behaviour typically profits from
queries with a low degree of specificity that produce
exhaustive information. More specific queries would
restrict the results and thus exclude potentially
important information.


--> Very useful for  3.6.1. The Wikidata Bib platform and the formalization of a reading discipline

Chaining
Once key elements of a subject have been identified,
users may follow referential connections between
sources to identify new sources of information.
In other words, information found in the retrieved
documents is used to modify or improve the previous query to better meet information needs of users

Browsing
Browsing is semi-directed searching in an area of
potential interest. This requires that the tools supporting these activities should have the capability of
processing the retrieved documents to filter potentially relevant information

Differentiating
Differentiating is characterized by activities that use
distinguishing features of source documents to filter
the documents according to their nature and quality


Monitoring
Monitoring is used for keeping up awareness of
the latest developments in a field by automatic
monitoring of particular sources

Extracting
Extracting is characterized by working through
sources to locate information of interest. There is
no general pattern describing these activities since in
principle, any type of information can be a target of
information seeking. It is thus advisable for users to
select those tools that generate exactly the type of
outputs that they require.


# Comments

## Tags
 1.1. The quest for interoperable knowledge
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q40065967)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q40065967)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q40065967/P921%3BP4510)  
