
Variability and memory of protein levels in human cells.
========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q40205119]  
  
Publication date : 19 of November, 2006  

# Highlights

Here, we studied
the variability of protein levels in human cells, as well as the temporal dynamics of this variability, and addressed whether cells
with higher than average protein levels eventually have lower than
average levels, and if so, over what timescale does this mixing
occur
We measured fluctuations over time in the levels of 20
endogenous proteins in living human cells, tagged by the gene
for yellow fluorescent protein at their chromosomal loci24.


We found that cell–cell variability in human protein levels can
have a long mixing time: proteins whose levels are higher or lower
than average can remain so for several days. Such long-memory noise
can act, through the cells’ regulatory circuitry3,11,21, to generate variability in cellular responses and phenotypes. In particular, proteins
from co-regulated systems such as the ribosome seem to fluctuate in a
much more correlated fashion than proteins from different pathways. This long-lasting, concerted noise might result, for example,
in ‘outlier’ cells that have different behaviour from the bulk of the
population. The observed long memory indicates that several cell
cycles might be needed for some signals and drugs to affect fully
populations of human cancer cells.

-->  2.4.3. States, identities, fates, attractors and phenotypical continuity

H1299 non-small cell lung carcinoma cell line

--> Considered "human cells"!

# Comments

Different cell types --> Different dynamics?
## Tags
1.4.4. Types of knowledge about cell types
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q40205119)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q40205119)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q40205119/P921%3BP4510)  
