
Comprehensive Classification of Retinal Bipolar Neurons by Single-Cell Transcriptomics.
=======================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q40967362]  

# Highlights
identified 15 types including all types observed previously, and two novel types, one of which has a non-canonical morphology and position

s. Conceptually, the very definition of a “cell type” is contentious. Existing taxonomies represent neurons as a hierarchy of types whose distinctions reflect criteria such as morphology, physiology, and gene expression (Sanes and Masland, 2015). While distinctions at the upper levels of this hierarchy are easily agreed upon (e.g. sensory vs. motor neurons), finer divisions are less obvious

Several recent studies have used single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) to group cells into types based on gene expression signatures. However, these studies have not been able to determine whether the groups represent distinct types, or whether all types in the population are represented. 
Among many obstacles, two stand out:
 - the number of cells profiled to date, typically ranging from a hundred to a few thousand, is likely too few for complete sampling and categorization.  
 - satisfactory classification requires that molecular criteria be validated against an orthogonal criterion of cell type.

 --> Why? Both obstacles are arbitrary in the absence of a definition of cell type.

 To comprehensively study BCs in a cost-effective manner we used Drop-seq,

 (1) how can one best use scRNA-seq to classify neuronal types?

 what is the full cohort of BC types?

 Fourteen of the 26 clusters generated by Louvain-Jaccard were identifiable as BCs by expression of the pan-BC markers Vsx2 and Otx2 (Baas et al., 2000; Burmeister et al., 1996), and absence of markers of other retinal classes (clusters 1 and 3–15; Figure 1C, F).

 We assigned the 14 BC clusters to types by inspecting the expression of known markers.

 Clusters 7 and 9 both expressed BC1 markers (Tacr3+Rcvrn−Syt2−). This was unexpected, as previous studies had indicated BC1 to be a single population.

 139 genes were >2 fold differentially expressed between them (FDR < 0.01), suggesting that they represented distinct cell types (see Figure 3A for examples).

--> You will always have degs between clusters due to leakage of training set.

BC1A markers labeled cells with bipolar morphology. Surprisingly, BC1B markers labeled cells that were unipolar, lacking a dendrite extending to the outer plexiform layer (OPL)

Taken together, our histological validation of a computationally derived molecular taxonomy unifies molecular and morphological signatures of BCs (Figure 6A, B).

--> A bit of an overstatement

We developed and applied an integrated strategy for building a comprehensive validated atlas of cell types. Challenges included (1) the need to harmonize different definitions of cell type (here, molecular and morphological)

--> Definition is used in a quite loose manner. It is not that cell types were define molecularly, but that the authors identified cells as belonging to certain cell types based on molecular markers of clusters. The difference is subtle, but important.

We also discovered two BC types not previously identified and generated an extensive resource for future studies.

BCs are an ideal class for cell type analysis. 

What defines a cell type? 

There is less agreement, however, on how to define a cell type. In C. elegans, the task is straightforward: each neuron can be viewed as a type, with a unique lineage, position, pattern of connectivity, molecular profile and functions.

--> This is too symplistic. The upper classes cannot be called types in C. elegans, then?

All RNAseq experiments were carried out at post-natal age (P) 17. Tg(Chx10-EGFP/cre,-ALPP)2Clc transgenic mice (Vsx2-GFP hereafter) were bred for two generations to CD1 (Charles River) and used for FACS experiments of GFP-positive cells

# Comments
