
Naming of neurones. Classification and naming of cat retinal ganglion cells.
============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q41052480]  

# Highlights

Many schemes of ganglion cell classification seek to classify the cells by some particular characteristic, such as the time course of the cells’ physiological responses or their dendritic morphology. It is here argued that such schemes are based on the Aristotelian concept of ‘essences’ and raise the same difficulties as have arisen with the essentialist approach to animal taxonomy. A better approach to the classification of neurones, it is proposed, is to base the classification on as many features of the cells as possible, and to regard the classification as an hypothesis, sub? ject to testing and modification by experience, about the ‘functional niches’ occupied by the cell types distinguished.

One aim of this article is to examine the logical presuppositions of different systems of ganglion cell nomenclature. A second aim is to use the conceptual framework provided by taxonomic theory to examine the logical and practical strengths of particular schemes of classification proposed for cat retinal ganglion cells. Our third aim is to develop a theoretical basis for the classifying and naming of neurones which is relevant to any population of neurones, in any species.

The categorising of properties as ‘accidental’ has often downgraded interest in them, resulting, as Tyner [1975] expresses it, ‘in much data being effectively discarded by either labelling atypical individuals “unnatural” or by creating for them new groups containing extremely small fractions of the total sample.’

The term W cell was chosen because the alphabetical sequence W/X/Y then follows the increasing axonal velocities of the three types

The choice of non-descriptive labels is noteworthy because it avoids in a simple way the use of the Aristotelian concept of essences. The cells might, for example, have been termed ‘linear’ and ‘non-linear’, which would have implied that these features were their essential characteristics. With hindsight, it is apparent that the ability of the X/Y nomenclature to accommodate readily the considerable subsequent accumulation of knowledge about the variability present in the properties of X and Y cells stems principally from the fact that, while various features were of course attributed to cells of a particular label, no single feature was initially defined as essential to the dichotomy.

The sluggish / brisk / sustained / transient / concentric / non-concentric scheme for classifying cells is obviously more cumbersome verbally than the Y/X/W scheme. The expanded set of descriptive terms might be valuable if they either avoided problems raised by the simpler non-descriptive terminology or illuminated relationships which were otherwise obscured.

In short, the Aristotelian essentialist approach, by creating sharp categories of cells, tends to make divisions among them which may be artificial. This tendency has been previously noted in the taxonomy of animals. The fatal flaw in essentialism is that there is no way of determining what the essential properties of an organism are and why these and no other properties are essential.’

--> We can have a "working essentialism" of  a set of properties.

The first problem is the tend? ency of the essentialist approach to make no distinction between descrip? tion and definition. In animal taxonomy, this distinction is embodied in the distinction between taxa and categories [Bock, 1973; see below]. Ca? tegories, such as family or species, can be defined, but taxa, such as Felidae or Felis domesticus, may only be described.

Cleland and Levick’s assumption that a definition had been laid down, clearly stems from a philosophical approach which tends to equate description with definition. Popper [1962, p. 34] in describing the essen? tialist approach to classification, remarks that all essentialists, including Aristotle ‘agreed with Plato in determining the task of pure knowledge as the discovery of the hidden nature or form or essence of thing.

The second problem is the tendency of the essentialist approach to equate identification with classification. Mayr [1969] and Tyner [1975] have recently stressed that these are quite distinct operations, Mayr [1969, p. 66] commenting that ‘Unlike identification, which deals with a few characters (ideally a single one) that throw a given specimen into one or the other line of the key, classification deals with and evaluates a multitude of characters, ideally all of them.’ The process of classification is inductive. After examination of a wide variety of properties in a sufficciently large sample of cells (ideally all cells), a classification of the cells into groups can be arrived at inductively, by generalizing from particular observations. A given cell can then be identified by a particular feature as a member of a certain group, but logically this process of identification is deductive. Often, however, the essentialist both classifies and identifies by the possession of one or a few essential features. For example. ‘... attention will be confined to a subset of the properties by which a neurone may be rapidly put in one or other class.

‘many classifications attempt to be both identification schemes and classifications’ and that ‘much of the development of modern taxonomy has been toward the clearer and clearer separation of these entirely different operations.’

- Avoidance of Essence-Indicating Names
- Avoidance of Role-Indicating Names

Even after these simplifications, however, two terminologies remain (Y/X/W and alpha/beta/gama) and seem likely to remain in separate use for some time. Parallel terminologies such as these are likely to arise whenever two classifications of the same population of neurones are based on types of observations which are difficult or impossible to make on the same individual cells.

both types of data cannot be obtained from the same individual cells. Thus, in most cases, an individual ganglion cell cannot be readily categorized in both schemes. As our understanding of these cells increases, one set of terms will presumably come to be preferred. For the moment, however, it seems necessary to retain the two terminologies, using each in its appropriate context.
--> Yes! And this can be scaled up! 

The use of descriptive prefixes to distinguish variations within the Y,X and W cell groups is common to all workers who have published on these cells, and might seem to impose an essentialist crust on a non-essentialist loaf, i.e., to introduce the Aristotelian concept of ‘essences’ into classifications otherwise non-essentialist in their presuppositions. We would argue, however, that this is not the case. 

These clusterings of properties may indicate some functional distinction between the two groups, and seem sufficient to justify a division of W cells into two subgroups. We suggest that these subgroups be given the non-descriptive names Wt and W2.

To summarise the critique of ganglion cell classifications presented above, it is not meant to suggest that any particular scheme of classifying ganglion cells, whether by morphology or physiology, is the correct one. We do mean to suggest that certain schemes are simpler, more adaptable to new findings and less likely to be a source of confusion than others. In the following, more theoretical section, an attempt is made to set out principles by which such schemes of classification might be devised for neuronal populations.

Towards a Theoretical Basis for the Classification of Neurones The
The two propositions are: 

(1) that any classification should be viewed not as a definition of cell groupings, but as an hypothesis that the cell groupings being delineated fulfill distinct functional roles; and 

(2) that the functional roles referred to by the classification should be defined in terms quite independent of the properties of the cells being classified

Darwin [1872, p. 576] suggested ‘... that community of descent is the hidden bond which naturalists have been seeking, and not ... the mere putting together and separating objects more or less alike.’ Thus, the theory of evolution made it possible for classifications of animals to be regarded as hypotheses about phylogenetic or cladistic relationships between them, and the aim of taxonomy became, in the words of J. S. Huxley [1940, p. 2], ‘the discovery of evolution at work’

This view of classification has at least three major advantages:
- As an hypothesis, a scheme of classification is a testable proposition, intended to be modified or even discarded if necessary, and therefore inherently adaptable to new accumulations of data. 
- Because observa? tions used to generate hypotheses cannot validly be used to test them, the testing process itself results in the collection of new data. The classification thus has the effect of generating new observations, rather than of formalising old ones.
- This view of classification requires that a distinction be made between the description of a group and the definition of the category to which it belongs.

If a classification is to be regarded as an hypothesis, what should the hypothesis be about? The theory of evolution provided a functional basis for the definition of various categories, and hence for the classification of all organisms, and taxonomy came to be regarded as an attempt to elucidate the processes of evolution. Clearly, some analogous basis is needed for the classification of neurones.

--> For me, the hypothesis is that the cell type, as defined, really can be identified 
    for the set of individuals of the taxonomic scope, given the other constraints

We would suggest that the functional roles played by various neurones do provide a basis for their classification into groups; and that the classification should be regarded as an hypothesis that particular groups of neurones fill particular functional niches.

One word of caution should be added here. The hypothesis that groups of cells in different species occupy the same functional niche is not to be equated with the suggestion that these groups are homologous. The criteria for the establishment of homology are independent of (although they overlap with) the considerations involved in defining a functional niche. Groups of cells in different species could occupy the same functional niche as a result of either homology or homoplasy.
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q41052480)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q41052480)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q41052480/P921%3BP4510)  
