
CA1 pyramidal cells have diverse biophysical properties, affected by development, experience, and aging
=======================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q41694511]  

# Highlights

Neuron types (e.g., pyramidal cells) within one area of the brain are often considered
homogeneous, despite variability in their biophysical properties. Here we review
literature demonstrating variability in the electrical activity of CA1 hippocampal
pyramidal cells (PCs), including responses to somatic current injection, synaptic
stimulation, and spontaneous network-related activity

 Our goals are to provide a synthesis of the literature for experimentalists studying CA1 PCs, to give theorists an idea of the rich diversity of behaviors models may need to reproduce to accurately represent these cells, and to provide suggestions for future research.

 However, it is not clear what should be the
ideal classification system. Should we group neurons by function, location, morphology,
biophysical properties, or some combination? Which, if any, of these groupings are
meaningful for predicting a cell’s contribution to cognition? Researchers may erroneously
assume that cells in one group are relatively homogeneous, but what is the extent and role of biophysical heterogeneity?

The potential functional significance
of cellular heterogeneity suggests it deserves more consideration than it has historically
received (Altschuler & Wu, 2010).

In contrast to studies that report no delay, some studies describe long spike latencies as ‘characteristic’ (Golding et al., 1999) or ‘typical’ (Storm, 1988) of CA1 PC firing.


With text and data mining (TDM), researchers are now automating these tasks to perform large-scale meta-analyses
(Rebholz-Schuhmann, Oellrich & Hoehndorf, 2012). A recent study by Tripathy et al. (2015)
used TDM to examine variation in biophysical properties, such as resting membrane
potential and input resistance, across multiple neuron types, including CA1 PCs. 

Wheeler et al. (2015) mined the hippocampal literature and identified 122 neuron types
based on biochemical, electrophysiological, and morphological features. These studies
demonstrate the power of TDM approaches and suggest there are more discoveries to be
made by mining the neuroscience literature (Akil, Martone & Van Essen, 2011).

--> 1.1.1

Mining can be expanded beyond just the text to data within
figures in published articles, made possible with tools developed by projects like Content
Mine (http://contentmine.org/) (Hartgerink & Murray-Rust, 2017). 

--> Nice mention of Peter :)

We can use this knowledge to study whether neurons share a common firing mechanism, and potentially reduce the number of designated cell classes by grouping neurons
accordingly. We may also be able to predict when a cell might shift between different
firing mechanisms due to changes in parameters, such as the density or kinetics of channels in the membrane.



# Comments

## Tags

2.4
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q41694511)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q41694511)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q41694511/P921%3BP4510)  
