
The dynamics and regulators of cell fate decisions are revealed by pseudotemporal ordering of single cells.
===========================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q41861103]  

# Highlights

Time-series gene expression analyses of bulk cells have difficulty distinguishing early and late phases of a transcriptional cascade or identifying rare subpopulations of cells, and single-cell proteomic methods rely on a priori knowledge of key distinguishing markers.

Applied to the differentiation of primary human myoblasts, Monocle revealed switch-like changes in expression of key regulatory factors

During differentiation, for example, each cell makes independent fate decisions by integrating a wide array of signals from other cells and executing a complex chore- ography of gene-regulatory changes. Thus individual cells can execute the same sequence of transcriptional changes over highly varying time scales. Unraveling the network of gene regulatory interactions remains a central goal of efforts to understand these processes.


As a population of cells captured at the same time may include many distinct intermediate differentiation states, considering only its average properties would mask trends occurring across individual cells.

Coupled with SPADE, cytometry can track changes in up to 32 proteins to reconstruct complex cellular hierarchies of differentiation and reveal rare cell states. In principle, single-cell RNA-Seq could also be used to resolve cellular transitions during differentiation through temporal profiling of the entire transcriptome.

We hypothesized that ordering whole-transcriptome profiles
of single cells with an unsupervised algorithm would improve temporal resolution during differentiation without a priori knowl- edge of marker genes

accommodate single-cell variation and to allow for multiple cell fates stemming from a single progenitor cell type.

Figure 1 Monocle orders single-cell RNA-Seq data of differentiating myoblasts in pseudotime.

We expanded primary human skeletal muscle myoblasts (HSMM) under high-mitogen conditions (GM) and induced differentiation by switching to low-serum medium (DM).

Monocle thus orders cells by progress through differentiation and can reconstruct branched biological processes, which might arise when a precursor cell makes cell fate decisions that govern the generation of multiple subsequent lineages. Importantly, Monocle is unsuper- vised and needs no prior knowledge of specific genes that distinguish cell fates, and is thus suitable for studying a wide array of dynamic biological processes.


Order cells in pseudotime via MST
Label cells by type
Differentially expressed genes by cell type
Differentially expressed genes across pseudotime
Gene expression clusters and trends

Cells in the second phase were positive for markers of muscle differentia- tion such as MYOG.

Pseudotime ordering of cells reveals genes activated or repressed early in differentiation, along with potential upstream regulators.

Moreover, single-cell analysis distinguishes cells of interest from contaminating cell types such as interstitial mesenchymal cells without experimental isolation that might disrupt cell-cell interactions important in the in vivo niche.

Because our approach requires no a priori knowledge of marker genes to reorder cells, it is suitable for discovering regulators and markers of poorly characterized temporal processes

Ordering the expression profiles of individual cells by biological progress is thus a useful tool for studying cell differentiation, and it could in principle be used to map regulatory networks that govern a much wider array of biological processes.

# Comments

For differentiation studies, discrete classes will be perceived as rather arbitrary, and in fact kind of are. Nevertheless, this simplification might be useful for understandable models and the logic precision might outweight the arbitrariousness.


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q41861103)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q41861103)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q41861103/P921%3BP4510)  
