
Beyond the frontiers of neuronal types.
=======================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q42156351]  

# Highlights
Going beyond the description of representative traits of distinct classes, we focus here on the analysis of atypical cells. We introduce a novel paradigm for neuronal type classification, assuming explicitly the existence of a structured continuum of diversity. Our approach, grounded on the theory of fuzzy sets, identifies a small optimal number of model archetypes. At the same time, it quantifies the degree of similarity between these archetypes and each considered neuron.


Because of these shortcomings, the boundaries between dif-
ferent types are blurred. Yet, despite this, all clustering methods used so far for neuronal classification inherently exclude the exis- tence of a graded separation between neuronal classes (Tyner, 1975; Parra et al., 1998). As an alternative, we propose here a novel approach, based on the theory of Fuzzy Sets (Zadeh, 1965, 2008), in which the absence of a strict dividing line between neuronal types is actually assumed as an explicit categorizing hypothesis.

In Fuzzy Set Theory (Zadeh, 1965; Jang et al., 1997; Xu et al., 2008), a data-point i can belong to a fuzzy class α with different degrees of membership, quantified by a mem- that the data-point i displays all the defining attributes of bership value miα. A membership value miα = 1.0indicates the class α and therefore fully belongs to it. A membership play any of the defining attributes of the class α and therefore value miα = 0.0 indicates that the data-point i does not dis- it does notbelongto itatall. In addition to these “black and white” cases, and extending ordinary set theory, intermedi- ate membership values 0 < miα < 1are admitted (Figure 1A), corresponding to a continuum of “gray” cases in which the data- point i displays only some of the defining attributes of class α.

A dataset can be partitioned into c fuzzy classes. In a fuzzy
partition each data-point can belong to multiple classes with different degrees of membership.

We denoted as archetypal classes of diversity (or, briefly, archetypes)the c∗ fuzzy classes in an optimized fuzzy partition. Given a set of archetypes and membership vectors for a pre- scribed fuzziness parameter μ,the main type of a cell i was m(1st) the archetype α with the largest membership component miα =m(1st).

Following analogous approaches in numerical taxonomy and ecology (Bezdek, 1974; Equiha, 1990; Salski, 2007), we used an established unsupervised algorithm (Dunn, 1973)to extract from our sample—based on the same features considered in Karagiannis et al. (2009)— a small number of fuzzy clusters, or archetypes. Archetypes—like usual clusters (called “crisp” in the context of fuzzy set theory)— are characterized by canonic prop- erties, manifesting common phenotypic trends

Class B glutamatergic neurons were the most superficial group
of glutamatergic neurons and exhibited modest voltage sag when hyperpolarized (Table 5)

--> "Group" is an interesting catch-all term

THE “RIGHT” NUMBER OF ARCHETYPES The four reference GABAergic archetypes and the typicality spec- trum which we found at μ = 1.349 were robust in a wide param- eter range. They were also optimal, in the sense that any attempt to reliably extract more archetypes from our sample was unsuc- cessful. Indeed, for μ < 1.204, even tiny changes in μ shattered entirely the extracted fuzzy partition (Figure 2E). Introducing a metaphor, one might say that adopting a too small μ would be like looking at a poor quality printed image through a macro lens. This would reveal most likely the low resolution of the halftone screen, rather than additional relevant details. Conversely, using atoo large μ would be like taking an out-of-focus snapshot (Figure 2F). Therefore, our present list of archetypes should be considered, citing again Tyner (1975,p.91),as“a temporary con- venience, a rather crude data storage system,” reflecting only our present state ofknowledge (and ignorance).
# Comments

Interesting use of "archetype". 
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q42156351)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q42156351)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q42156351/P921%3BP4510)  
