
Simultaneous epitope and transcriptome measurement in single cells.
===================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q42595570]  
  
Publication date : 31 of July, 2017  

# Highlights

Here, we describe cellular indexing of transcriptomes
and epitopes by sequencing (CITE-seq), a method in which
oligonucleotide-labeled antibodies are used to integrate
cellular protein and transcriptome measurements into an
efficient, single-cell readout

We devised a digital, sequencing-based readout for protein
levels by conjugating antibodies to oligonucleotides (oligos) that
can be captured by oligo-dT primers (used in most scRNA-seq
library preparations), contain a barcode for antibody identification and include a handle for PCR amplification.

The amplified cDNAs and antibody-derived tags (ADTs) can be separated by size and converted
into Illumina-sequencing libraries independently

 Most droplets (97.2%) that were identified
as containing human, mouse or mixed cells by transcriptome
(Fig. 1b) received the same species classification by ADT
counts (Fig. 1c)

Using ADT levels, we were able to construct cytometry-like
‘biaxial’ gating plots (Fig. 2b) and compare these qualitatively and
quantitatively to the flow cytometry data (Fig. 2a).

We prepared a
CITE-seq panel of 13 well-characterized monoclonal antibodies that recognize cell-surface proteins routinely used as markers for immune-cell classification (Supplementary Table 2).

--> 3.1. Cell-type markers in Wikidata

Unsupervised graph-based
clustering using RNA expression revealed recognizable cell types
that express select marker genes 

We detect strong ADT enrichment in the correct immune
populations—CD3e within the T-cell cluster; CD4 and CD8a
in largely nonoverlapping T-cell subpopulations; CD19 almost
exclusively in B-cells; CD56, CD16 and CD8a in the NK cluster;
and CD11c and CD14 in the monocyte and dendritic cell cluster 

--> Well, as expected, as labels are ad hoc.

 In addition, clustering
based on ADT levels results in clear and consistent cell-type
separation

 (d–f) NK cells are split into CD56bright and CD56dim populations
based on CD56 ADT levels. Histogram of CD56 (d) and CD16 (e) levels in the CD56bright and CD56dim populations. (f) Differential gene expression analysis
between the CD56bright and CD56dim cells. 


Finally, we have shown that the CITE-seq is fully compatible with
a commercially available single-cell platform (10x Genomics) and
should be readily adaptable to other droplet-, microwell- and combinatorial-indexing-based high-throughput single-cell sequencing
technologies2,7–10 with either no or minor customizations


# Comments

## Tags
1.4.2.1. Wet-lab methods and their differences


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q42595570)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q42595570)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q42595570/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Simultaneous%20epitope%20and%20transcriptome%20measurement%20in%20single%20cells.'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
