
Non-equivalence of Wnt and R-spondin ligands during Lgr5+ intestinal stem-cell self-renewal
===========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q42509225]  
  
Publication date : 03 of May, 2017  

# Highlights
. However, redundancy between the 19 mammalian Wnt proteins and 10 FZD receptors1 and Wnt hydrophobicity have made it difficult to attribute these functions directly to Wnt ligands2-spondin ligands (RSPO1–RSPO4) engage distinct LGR4–LGR6, RNF43 and ZNRF3 receptor classes10–13, markedly potentiate canonical Wnt/β-catenin signalling, and induce intestinal organoid growth in vitro and Lgr5+ ISCs in vivo8,14–17.

We show that the default fate of Lgr5+ ISCs is to differentiate, unless both RSPO and Wnt ligands are present.

the using highly specific, ligand-level pharmacological perturbation. We inhibited endogenous RSPO signalling with soluble ectodomains (ECDs) of the RSPO receptors LGR5, ZNRF3 or RNF43 (refs 11–13, 18),

RSPO2 simultaneously bound both ZNRF3 ECD and LGR5 ECD by yeast surface display analysis (Extended Data Fig. 1h–n), consistent with RSPO proteins engaging LGR4–LGR6 and RNF43/ZNRF3 via spa-tially distinct interface

We thus performed tamoxifen-mediated line-age tracing of Lgr5+ ISCs in Lgr5-eGFP-IRES-creER; Rosa26-tdTomatomice. 


Crucially, either Wnt or RSPO ligand loss-of-function (Ad-Fzd8-CRD or Ad-LGR5-ECD) elicited virtually identical single-cell clusters, with marked transit amplifying cell predominance and pronounced loss of both the cycling and non-cycling Lgr5+ ISC clusters (Fig. 5a, Supplementary Table 5), identical to the inference from in vivo line-age tracing (Fig. 2a, d). Ad-Fzd8-CRD and Ad-LGR5-ECD identically extinguished CBC markers (Lgr5, Olfm4, Ascl2 and Tnrsf19), Wnt target genes (Axin2 and Cd44), RSPO receptors (Rnf43 and Znrf3) and FZD receptors (Fzd2 and Fzd7) 

Both in vivo lineage tracing and single-cell RNA-seq analysis of Wnt or RSPO inhibition concordantly reveal that the default fate of Lgr5+ISCs is passive lineage commitment. By contrast, self-renewal of Lgr5+ISCs is an active process requiring both Wnt and RSPO as priming and self-renewal factors, respectively.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q42509225)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q42509225)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q42509225/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q42509225&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/NATURE22313)  
