
Rutabaga by any other name: extracting biological names.
========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q42599537]  

# Highlights
This article examines emerging techniques to
access biological resources through extraction of entity names and relations among them.

 Information extraction has been an active
area of research in natural language processing and there are promising results for information extraction applied to news stories,
e.g., balanced precision and recall in the 93–95% range for identifying person, organization and location names. But these results do
not seem to transfer directly to biological names, where results remain in the 75–80% range.

1.1. Why names are important
Names of biological entities provide the critical links
across these different information sources—we can think
of them as indices into the data. This article focuses on
the use of biological names4 for information access,
looking specifically at why this is a hard problem and
what techniques are being developed to assist biologists.
Research in natural language processing (NLP) has developed a number of techniques that are now being
applied to information access in biology


Biological names are complex. The language used to
describe biological knowledge is constantly changing
because our understanding of biology constantly expands. New terms are added to name the new entities
(genes, proteins, and pathways); in some cases, terms are
removed or refined as knowledge is reorganized. The
names are used to communicate knowledge among researchers. This means that biology is particularly dependent on shared naming conventions.

Thus for the template element task, ‘‘General Motors’’ might
be the organization name, while ‘‘GM’’ would be included as an alias (alternate name). Listing these as
separate entities would be an error of commission (or a
precision error)9 for the template element task

3. Are names in biology harder than names in news?
These results raise the question: why do results for
biology appear to be worse than for news? There are a
number of possible explanations


Interannotator agreement is far lower for the biological tasks than for MUC newswire (F -measure of 84–
89% vs. 97% for news—see Table 1). This may be due to
the fact that biologists are being asked to perform a
linguistic task that is, from their point of view, somewhat artificial

The work by Craven and Kumlien [27] explores the
use of curated biological databases as a source of
‘‘ground truth’’ or gold standard data.


Gene names are not, strictly
speaking, proper names; furthermore, gene names are productive16 
and they are often descriptive.

16 That is, new gene names can be created by following implicit or
explicit rules of gene naming; for example, genes in a family can be
differentiated by adding Greek letters as prefixes, as in a-catenin and
b-catenin.

--> Important for 2.1.1

 the Mouse Genome Database17 publishes a weekly nomenclature report, which
lists the ‘‘nomenclature events’’ for the week, usually
around 50–100 events, including new names and names
that have been withdrawn

A search for the term ‘‘asp’’ in
Acromed20 returned over 40possible meanings, including ‘‘abnormal spindle protein,’’ ‘‘antisense promoter,’’
and ‘‘ankylosing spondylitis.’’


One known source of precision errors is the gene/
protein ambiguity. Since genes are often named after the
protein they code for, there is a systematic ambiguity of
names. Hatzivassiloglou et al. [29] developed a classifier
that was able to approach human performance on this
task. Human annotators agreed approximately 78% of
the time while the classifier performed at 75% accuracy,
using the human tagged data as a gold standard.

--> Often is not even possible, which is a problem of the source. 
    Relevant for 3.2: by engaging in annotation, "field" scientists 
    can realize the power of precise use of concepts.
    Also, maybe instead of using "agreement between experts" we could
    use a more reliable metric (semantically readable justifications for taggings)

Names are critical for biology because they provide
indices into the results and the literature. Biology needs
information extraction technology to help manage the
proliferation of names and their synonyms. However,
results for named entity tagging in biology have lagged
behind those reported for newswire


# Comments
Use of comic sans.

Kind of beginning of biomedical text mining.
## Tags
1.1.1
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q42599537)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q42599537)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q42599537/P921%3BP4510)  
