
Brain structure. Cell types in the mouse cortex and hippocampus revealed by single-cell RNA-seq.
================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q42776227]  

# Highlights
Here, we have used large-scale single-cell RNA-seq to classify cells in the mouse somatosensory cortex hippocampal CA1 region. We found 47 molecularly distinct subclasses which revealed comprising all known major cell types in the cortex. 

The dataset allowed us to identify the most specific markers for each class, many of which are known to play a functional role in these cells (fig. S5). S1 pyramidal cells were marked by Tbr1.

Every subclass was detected in multiple mice (fig. S1K), arguing that cell identity was preserved across these genetically outbred (CD-1) animals.

--> Very nice that they were concerned with intraspecific variation.

We identified seven subclasses of S1 pyramidal cells 
We found two types of CA1 glutamatergic cells 
We found 16 subclasses of interneurons
We identified two types of immune cells: microglia (the tissue-resident macrophages of the brain) and perivascular macrophages.
Six subpopulations of oligodendrocytes were identified

Astrocytes formed two subclasses (Fig. 3A and fig. S9A),distinguished by differential expression of Gfap (type 1) and Mfge8 (type 2).

--> Interesting wording. A type is "found"/"identified" or is a type is defined?


Across the full set of cell types, transcription factors formed a complex, layered regu- latory code, suggesting a plausible mechanism for
the
maintenance of adult differentiated cell types. More broadly, these results showcase the power of explorative single-cell RNA-seq, and point the way toward future whole-brain and even whole-organism cell type discovery and characteriza- tion
# Comments 
Re reading.


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q42776227)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q42776227)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q42776227/P921%3BP4510)  
