
Decoupling genetics, lineages, and microenvironment in IDH-mutant gliomas by single-cell RNA-seq.
=================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q42776089]  
  
Publication date : 01 of March, 2017  

# Highlights

We applied this approach to understand the differences between two types of isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH)–mutant gliomas: astrocytoma (IDH-A) and oligodendroglioma (IDH-O). ID

We infer that both IDH-A and IDH-O share the same developmental hierarchy, consisting in each case of three subpopulations of malignant cells: nonproliferating cells differentiated along the astrocytic and oligodendrocytic lineages, and proliferative undifferentiated cells that resemble neural stem/progenitor cells.

In contrast to the similarity in glial lineages, IDH-A and IDH-O differ significantly in their TME, and in particular in the abundance of microglia/macrophage cells. Microglia and macrophages also differ between IDH-A tumors of different grades. Our study redefines the cellular composition of human IDH-mutant gliomas, with important implications for disease management.

We dissected these influences in
isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH)–mutant gliomas by combining 14,226 single-cell RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) profiles from 16 patient samples with bulk RNA-seq profiles from 165
patient samples.

n adults, diffuse gliomas are clas-
sified into three main categories on the basis of
integrated genetic and histologic parameters:
IDH–wild-type glioblastoma (GBM) is the most
prevalent and aggressive form of the disease,

whereas mutations in IDH1 (or less frequently
IDH2) define two major classes of gliomas: as-
trocytoma (IDH-A) and oligodendroglioma (IDH-O)

only about half of the genes that were differen-
tially expressed according to bulk TCGA samples
were also differentially expressed between the
single malignant cells of the two tumor types (Fig.
1B and fig. S4). This suggests that the remaining
differentially expressed genes may reflect differ-
ences in the TME rather than differences in the
expression programs of malignant cells.

However, scoring cells by the relative expres-
sion of microglia-specific versus macrophage-
specific genes revealed a continuum rather than
a bimodal distribution (Fig. 5B) This is difficult
to reconcile with a simple model of two popula-
tions (microglia and macrophages) and suggests
additional influences on these expression programs.
Furthermore, even the top macrophage-like cells
in gliomas have lower macrophage scores than
macrophages from melanoma tumors (Fig. 5C)
(5). Thus, the glioma microenvironment might
have altered the expression profiles of macro-
phages, thereby decreasing their difference from
microglia.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q42776089)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q42776089)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q42776089/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q42776089&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.AAI8478)  
