
TELOCYTES - a case of serendipity: the winding way from Interstitial Cells of Cajal (ICC), via Interstitial Cajal-Like Cells (ICLC) to TELOCYTES.
=================================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q42914236]  
  
Publication date : 26 of March, 2010  

# Highlights

Ramon y Cajal discovered a particular cell type in the gut, which he named ‘interstitial neurons’ more that 100 years ago. In the early1970s, electron microscopy/electron microscope (EM) studies showed that indeed a special interstitial cell type corresponding to thecells discovered by Cajal is localized in the gut muscle coat, but it became obvious that they were not neurons. Consequently, they wererenamed ‘interstitial cells of Cajal’ (ICC) and considered to be pace-makers for gut motility.

peculiar interstitial cells were found in: upper and lower urinary tracts, blood vessels, pancreas, male and female reproductive tracts, mammary gland, placenta, and, recently, in theheart as well as in the gut

Such cells, now mostly known as interstitial Cajal-like cells (ICLC), were given different and confusing names.

Moreover, ICLC are only apparently similar to canonical ICC. In fact, EM and cell cultures revealed very particular features of ICLC, which unequivocally distinguishes them from ICC and all other interstitial cells: the presence of 2–5 cell body prolongations that are very thin(less  than  0.2  m,  under  resolving  power  of  light  microscopy),  extremely  long  (tens  to  hundreds  of  m),  with  a  moniliform  aspect(many dilations along), as well as caveolae.

Given the unique dimensions of these prolongations (very long and very thin) and to avoidfurther confusion with other interstitial cell types (e.g.fibroblast, fibrocyte, fibroblast-like cells, mesenchymal cells), we are proposing the term TELOCYTES for them, and TELOPODES for their prolongations, by using the Greek affix ‘telos’

What was at the beginning? The answer is: thecells that S. Ramon y Cajal discovered in the muscle coat of the gutand  called  ‘interstitial  neurons’  more  than  100  years  ago 


Fig.  1Rabbit  colon;  circular  muscle  layer.  One  interstitial  cell  of  Cajal(ICC) with an elongated body and three processes located in the connective interstitium

mong  the  pio-neers of this ‘re-discovery’ were M.S. Faussone-Pellegrini [2] and,independently, L. Thuneberg [3]: it was immediately clear that thesecells  were  not  neurons.  Therefore,  scientists  labelled  themInterstitial Cells of Cajal (ICC). From then the ‘interstitial neurons’ ofCajal were buried with all the honours they deserved and ‘InterstitialCells of Cajal (ICC)’ were born and grew (Figs. 1 & 2).

et  us  see  what  has  happened  and  what  might  happen.Fascinated by ICC, Popescu and his team looked for cells locatedin  pancreas  [12,  13]  (see  Figs.  3–5),  where  Cajal  also  saw  his‘interstitial neurons’. The Bucharest team extended their studiesto  other  organs:  myometrium  (see  Figs.  6  &  7),    fallopian  tube,placenta,  mammary  gland,  gall  bladder,  mesentery,  pulmonaryveins ([14–22]), demonstrating the frequency and the ubiquity ofthe cell type they found. Noteworthy, a series of publications wasdedicated to the presence and significance of Interstitial Cajal-likeCells  (ICLC)  in  mammalian  and  human  myocardium  and  epi-cardium  [23–33]; 


The existenceof a (‘new’) not yet described cell type became increasingly clearto  both:  the  Bucharest  experts  and  others.  However,  the  namechosen was not so (much) different from ICC: interstitial Cajal-likecells (ICLC) (first used in [15]), since at that time the aim was tostress  how  similar  these  cells  were  to  ICC.  Incidentally,  this  wasnot a good idea because, in fact, there were only a few similarities,not  to  mention  the  peculiar  morphology  of  the  ICLC,  a  morphol-ogy that is unique among all other interstitial cell types.

Fig.  6Digitally  coloured  EM  image  of  a  telocyte  in  rat  myometrium:  telocyte  (blue),  SMCs  (Sienna-brown);  N  Nuclei.  Note  three  long,  moniliformprocesses that encircle bundles of cross-cut smooth muscle cells. 

Fig. 10Representative scanning electron micrograph. Monkey left ventricular myocardium.
--> Nice image

Obviously, the cells that we named ‘ICLC’ are different from ICC.Therefore, it is reasonable (even mandatory) to give them a dif-ferent name that refers to them, only. As the ‘interstitial neurons’became  known  as  ‘Interstitial  Cells  of  Cajal’,  we  think  that  the‘Interstitial  Cajal-like  Cells’  should  be  called  ‘TELOCYTES’ 

General  aspect  of  the  telocyte  is  of  a  small,  oval-shaped  cellularbody,  containing  a  nucleus,  surrounded  by  a  small  amount  ofcytoplasm.  The  cellular  body  average  dimensions  are,  as  meas-ured  on  EM  images,  9.39  [micron]m  3.26  [micron]m  (min  6.31 m; max 16.42 m). The nucleus occupies about 25% ofthe cell volume and contains clusters of heterochromatin attachedto the nuclear envelope.The  perinuclear  cytoplasm  is  rich  in  mitochondria  (whichoccupy  about  5%  of  the  cell  body),  contains  a  small  Golgi complex, as well as elements of rough and smooth endoplasmicreticulum  and  cytoskeletal  elements  (thin  and  intermediate filaments)

--> Very nice, long description of the cell type. Prime example for 3.10 Minimal Information About New Cell Classes


# Comments

Diagnostic description: 

  A cell with a small, oval-shaped body with around 10 micrometers of diameter present in the interstitium of several organs, like the pancreas and the heart. Perinuclear cytoplasm rich in mitochondria. One to five long cytoplasmic protrusions (telopodes) extending from tens to hudreds of micrometers and mostly below 0.2 microns of caliber. Telopodes branch with dicotomous pattern.


Additional information: 

- Telopode emerge from the cell body, and then gradually thin.
- H&E staining cannot differentiate telocytes and fibroblasts, and telopodes are below the resolving power of light microscopy.
- The expression of c-kit receptors varies among telocyte populations
- Telocytes can be piriform (one telopode), spindle shaped (two telopodes), triangular (three telopodes) or stellate (four or more telopodes)- They differ functionally from fibroblasts, and may play different roles in different organs. 



## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q42914236)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q42914236)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q42914236/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q42914236&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/J.1582-4934.2010.01059.X)  
