
Key transitions during the evolution of animal phototransduction: novelty, "tree-thinking," co-option, and co-duplication.
==========================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q46221687]  

# Highlights

"Duplication" (either by copying or by fission) happens at other levels of biological organization than gene duplication. Other novel traits originate as new combinations of existing traits, a process sometimes termed bricolage, or tinkering.

In addition to duplication plus divergence, evolutionary novelties often originate as new combinations of existing genes, structures, or species.Whole gene networks are often co-opted to function in new contexts.

To what extent do co-duplicated genes respond to natural selection as a unit of interacting proteins rather than as individual genes? 

Rods an cones duplicity theory was first supported by two morphological classes of vertebrate photoreceptor cells.

Linear perspective on the origin of rods and cones is that a subset of one cell type gradually transformed into another cell type. That vertebrate cones are more ancient than rods.

Rods and cones may represent evolutionary duplicates or paralogs. The similarity of expressed protein components of cell types may support duplication of the cell types. The realization that rod and cone phototransduction pathways represent evolutionary duplicates suggests two areas for future work. 

1 - Was natural selection involved in the differentiation? To what extent does selection act on the entire biochemical pathway as compared to the individual genes? 

2 - A second area for future study is to extend our interpretation to the next level of biological organization above the pathway to the entire cell type.

Animals possess two major classes of photoreceptor cells, ciliary and rhabdomeric. 

The linear explanation for diversity among ciliary photoreceptors is displayed as a carousel of varying photoreceptor morphologies revolving around a central ancestral state, each separated by a single linear transition .

Tree-thinking provides another perspective on animal photoreceptor origins.

Co-option, not co-duplication was responsible for the origins of the interactions between opsins and G-proteins in the first ciliary, rhabdomeric

For instance, can gene duplications provide a selective context for cell type duplications to occur? Can co-option by a given cell type of an alternative signaling or developmental pathway reinforce the evolution of novel tissues, such as vertebrate or molluscan retinas? 

# Comments

Very good case study of cell type divergence. Considers major classes of cell types: rods and cones, using common features for a range of species. Evolutionary toughts are restricted to species-specific cell types

Archetypes. 

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q46221687)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q46221687)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q46221687/P921%3BP4510)  
