
What is a glial cell?
=====================
  
  [@wikidata:Q46388366]  

# Highlights
In short, virtually every aspect of brain de- velopment and function involves a neuron-glial part-nership. It is no longer tenable to consider glia as passive support cells

These papers review the amazing findings of the last few years that some “glia” can actually behave as multipotent neural stem cells that can generate neurons, both in vitro and in vivo. Radial glia and subventricular zone astrocytes have all been shown to do this in developing and adult brains, respectively.

When should a cell be called a glial cell? Several papers in this issue will review the astounding recent discovery that in developing rodent brains, radial glia give rise to the majority ofpyramidal neurons. So, are these radial glia actually glial cells after all? This question is especially thorny given that radial glia also subserve a traditional “glial” function of guiding the migration of developing neurons.

Thus, I see no reason why we shouldn’t return to the nomen- clature ofthe early neurohistologists and refer to radial glial cells as neuroepithelial cells, just as we do in the developing retina

Similarly, should the subventricular zone astrocytes that generate neurons be referred to as “astrocytes”? I propose that we call them arturocytes in honor of the person who discovered them and so beautifully demonstrated their function as neural stem cells. It is far past time to stop calling every neural cell in the brain that is not a neuron, a glial cell.

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q46388366)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q46388366)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q46388366/P921%3BP4510)  
