
Neuronal cell-type classification: challenges, opportunities and the path forward.
==================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q46326031]  

# Highlights

Conceptual difficulties persist. Borrowing from the field of species taxonomy, we propose principles to be followed in the cell-type classification effort, including:
- the incorporation of multiple, quantitative features as criteria, 
- the use of discontinuous variation to define types and 
- the creation of a hierarchical system to represent relationships between cells. 

We review the progress of classifying cell types in the retina and cerebral cortex and propose a staged approach for moving forward with a systematic cell-type classification in the nervous system. 

Many have come to believe that systematic categorization of cell types is an essential prerequisite for understanding mechanisms, and the descriptive enterprise has been revived.

It is difficult to know how fine and firm the distinctions used to distinguish neuronal types from one another should be. If we take account of all the differences between neurons the very notion of neuronal types becomes ephemeral. Conversely, coarse distinctions ( (motor neurons or cortical pyramidal cells, for example) are of little value for many experimental purposes. Is there a ‘sweet spot’ somewhere in between?

Purposes of cell-type classification:

- Reproducibility. One important purpose of neuronal classification is to enable the same types of neurons to be studied repeatedly.

Crick, who noted, “It is common for the experimentalist to record that, say, 25% of the neurons studied behave in a particular way, 37% in a different way and a further 15% in a third way. There is no indication what type of neuron they are. This is not science but rather natural history” (REF. 14).

- Genetic access. Increasingly, one goal of classification is to enable genetic access to specific cell types so that they can be marked and/or manipulated

- Discovery. As known cell types are catalogued, previously unrecognized ones may emerge.

- Studying disease. Some brain diseases primarily affect specific cell types.

- Generating a ‘parts list’. It is therefore fair to say that we have no hope of understanding the brain without an accounting of cell types and their properties.

Another problem is that a unifying definition of neuronal type should involve all three categories of properties: physiological, morphological and molecular. Although such a satisfying correspondence has been shown for some types, it seems unlikely that this will always be the case.

Cell non‑autonomy also limits the utility of neuronal connectivity as a criterion: the loss of synaptic inputs or targets can alter a neuron’s place in a circuit without causing any direct change to the neuron itself. Conversely, not all molecular properties are cell autonomous or static.

The problems of defining species and neuronal cell types are similar in many ways, suggesting that there may be lessons to learn from the systematists.

It has been proposed that a cell type should be defined as “a set of cells… that change in evolution together… and are evolutionarily more closely related to each other than to other cells”. In practice, however, there are few cases in which data are available to make this judgement. It may be more realistic to find ways to classify types within a species and then use that classification to launch an evolutionary inquiry.

--> The Arendt article is really influential

Perhaps most useful is a third school of systematics, known as typological, taxonomic or phenetic systematics, which groups individuals into species according to their similarity of genotype and/or phenotype. There are several key principles that this approach advocates, which may provide lessons for cell‑type classification.

--> Yes! The phenetic line seems to be the most in concert with my classification goals.

 - Group (that is, ‘type’) membership should be based on multiple criteria rather than on a single so‑called ‘essential’ feature that the investigator favours. 
 - The criteria for group membership should be rule‑based, explicit and quantitative.
 - Groupings should be hierarchical rather than flat to acknowledge the validity of both coarse and fine divisions.
 - Groupings generated by this approach should be viewed as hypotheses to be tested rather than inflexible rules.
 - Classification should focus on discontinuities between groups and ignore parameters that vary continuously.

 --> These points are super in line with my theoretical views on cell types.

Cell‑type categorization for all retinal neuronal classes is well underway. Light microscopic validation of the physiologically and molecularly defined types provided strong evidence indicating that all the criteria converged on the same set of types.

In general, cortical neurons are divided into two classes, namely, glutamatergic excitatory neurons and GABAergic inhibitory neurons, with multiple ‘subclasses’ within each class.The generation of many interneuron specific GFP mouse lines has increased our knowledge about interneuron types. Nonetheless, it is still unclear exactly how many cell types constitute each inhibitory subclass.

Criteria. Taxonomists stress that group membership should be based on multiple criteria rather than a single ‘essential’ feature. A corollary is that groups should not be named for the supposedly essential feature, as this will often end up being misleading. 

Indeed, there may be no single characteristic that is possessed by every group member. As noted by Tyner, a pioneer in applying insights from systematics to neuroscience, “A biological population can be described in terms of a substantial list of features such that (a) each member of the group possesses a large number of the features; (b) each feature is possessed by a large number of individuals in the group; and (c) no feature is necessarily possessed by every member of the group”.

--> I slightly disagree with that for the case of cell types. 
    I believe that "essential" classes are used in practice for
    experimental definitions of cell tipes. 

Use of hierarchical (multilevel) rather than flat (single‑level) classification systems has the following two advantages: it includes relationships between types as an intrinsic feature of the classification, and it provides a flexible way to update the system in light of new information.

Ultimately, this will be informative and useful not only in refining the cell‑type classification but also in understanding the relationship between a cell’s variable states and its core cell‑type identity.

Classification should be based on a hierarchical scheme (as described above) so that additional groupings can be added or interpo‑ated as new information becomes available

Overall, the enterprise of cell‑type classification has the potential to transform our view of nervous system function and malfunction. Many problems remain, and, as is the case for species taxonomy, cell‑type classification schemes need to be regarded as hypotheses to be tested and refined as we move through these stages. Nonetheless, the pace of progress is rapid, and some of the conceptual and technical challenges that seem formidable today are likely to be surmounted over the next decade.

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q46326031)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q46326031)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q46326031/P921%3BP4510)  
