
Genuine semantic publishing
===========================
  
  [@wikidata:Q46412887]  

# Highlights

Closer inspection, however, reveals that these approaches are mostly not about publishing semantic representations, as the name seems to suggest. Rather, they take the processes and outcomes of the current narrative-based publishing system for granted and only work with already published papers. This includes approaches involving semantic annotations, semantic interlinking, semantic integration, and semantic discovery, but with the semantics coming into play only after the publication of the original article. While these are interesting and important approaches, they fall short of providing a vision to transcend the current publishing paradigm. We argue here for taking the term semantic publishing literally and work towards a vision of genuine semantic publishing.

The most important shortcoming of the current publication system is that scientific papers do not come with formal semantics that could be processed, aggregated, and interpreted in an automated fashion.

In 2001, TimBerners-Lee and James Hendler sketched how they expect researchers in the future to produce machine-readable descriptions of their experiments and findings, in the form of mark-up of their research papers or as independent representations made public on the web [7]. Unfortunately, subsequent work has deviated from this general proposal.

We argue here that we should aim for semantic publishing in the literal sense, which we call genuine semantic publishing to distinguish it from the existing term.

We are using the word semantic in its narrow technical sense of carrying a formal logic-based representation ofthe content’s meaning.

We argue here for a more intuitive definition of semantic publishing that is broader in the sense that no narrative article needs to be present, and that is at the same time narrower in the sense that the semantic representation has to be a first-class object created and published by the authors.

In the existing literature, we often encounter the implicit assumption that the semantic representation of knowledge has to start from a textual representation, and therefore writing a statement down in natural language always needs to be the first step.

There is no law of nature that research findings can only be formalized after they have been expressed in a narrative text. The entire approach of semantic annotation is based on this text-first paradigm, which is a perfectly valid approach but is surely not the only possibility.

From a different angle, a number of approaches have been proposed for what has been called executable papers

in contrast to PDF – semantic markup comes very naturally with HTML via technologies such as RDFa.these semantic representations are mostly not independent statements but tightly linked to the narrative text

Structured Digital Abstracts [11,43], having been first proposed ten years ago, are probably the oldest approach of this kind. Their basic idea is to require for articles to come with a machine-interpretable summary of the main claims, besides the classical abstract for human readers. They proposed to let authors themselves capture the claims of their own scientific contributions, such as a newly discovered protein-protein interaction, in a notation with formal semantics.

Nanopublications, finally, are an approach to use the RDF language to represent “the smallest unit of publication” [34] or “core scientific statements with associated context” [25].

To summarize, there are a number of existing approaches that cover important aspects of what we think deserves the term semantic publishing under its intuitive interpretation, but they are normally overshadowed by the more conventional approaches of semantic annotation and semantic interlinking introduced above.

genuine semantic publishing: 
- essential coverage: If you had to summarize a paper in one sentence, the content of this sentence has to be present in the semantic representation too.

- authoritativeness of the source of the semantic representations: In the case of the publication of a scientific result, the only authoritative source are the researchers (who are called authors in this context).

has long been known in the area of knowledge engineering that the process of formalizing expert knowledge is not merely a process of “transferring” or “converting” knowledge from existing representations inside the heads of experts to formal representations of a form that can be stored in a knowledge base. Rather it has to be seen as a creative modeling process [14,48] where formal structures are generated that existed only in an incomplete, implicit, and unconscious form in the experts’ heads

Genuine semantic publishing requires the authors of scientific results to perform the modeling task themselves, because they are – by definition – the only authoritative source. We claim that – contrary to many existing approaches – we should not try to re- lieve the authors of this burden (though we should of course try to help them)

--> Key paragraphs.

As Tim Berners-Lee and James Hendler made clear when the Semantic Web was just about to come into existence as a research field, it “involves asking people to make some extra effort” [7]

--> That is why it hasn't flourished yet. So we need some kind of push towards it. Financial incentives for individuals? A big project which hires scientists for that? Other kind of incentives? A moral revolution in the way we see science? Super hard, super key.

1. A scientific work needs to come with formal representations that are semantic, in the sense that they are not just machine processable but machine interpretable, and that are linked so they add to the existing formal body of knowledge.
2. These semantic representations might be underspecified but need to have essential coverage in the sense that they cover (at least) the core of the main claims of the given work
3. They need to be authentic in the sense that the respective authoritative persons create or approve the semantic representations. Domain data can only come from the researchers, and metadata has to come from the people responsible for the form of the published work, i.e. the researchers and/or the editors.
4. The semantic representations need to be a primary component of the published work, made avail- able together with everything else at the time of publication. They must furthermore have an inde- pendent existence in their own right and not merely be appended or attached to the main entity as noncommittal extra data.
5. The semantic representations and their containers need to be fine-grained and light-weight.Even though such semantic representations might often be published in larger collections, the publication of minimal additions and corrections needs to be possible without a large overhead.

it is probably helpful to briefly discuss and illustrate what types of claims a scientific work can make.

A large part of the body of scientific work deals with what has been called “normal” or “puzzle-solving” science [29]. In this type of science, known kinds of relations and properties are discovered for objects of known kinds, such as a statement that a given mutation of a given gene can be the cause for a given disease. Such types of statements are relatively straightforward to formalize.


More disruptive and more abstract kinds of scientific contributions involve the criticism of existing concepts or arguments, and the advocation of new ones. In the most extreme case, this can consist of proposing a paradigm shift that can lead to a scientific revolution [29]. By their nature, these types of contributions are harder to formalize, but it is always possible to at least make the action of criticizing or advocating explicit and to position the objects in the space of related concepts, arguments, or paradigms.


It turns out that all the technologies needed for applying genuine semantic publishing are already available and most of them are very mature and reliable. There are no technical obstacles preventing us from releasing our results from today on as genuine semantic publications, even though more work is needed on ontologies that cover all relevant aspects and areas and on nice and intuitive end-user interfaces to make this process as easy as possible.

But we also make our work available to software agents, for which we have different representations that consist of formal RDF statements instead of narrative text. Importantly, these RDF statements convey the same main message as the narrative text: They are different representations of the same work.

We can try to capture part of the content of these criteria in RDF as well, but at some point we have to
stop and be content with an informal description in natural language (at the latest when we hit the symbol grounding problem). However, we believe that it is always possible to build a formal representation of the main content at the highest level, such as introducing and advocating a new concept, even though we will mostly not be able to provide a complete formal definition. In this sense, such a representation is underspecified but has essential coverage.

The downsides and limitations of the current scientific publishing paradigm have become apparent in many ways, from the researchers unable to deal with the avalanche of new papers published in their fields to the struggles of elevating scientific datasets to the level of appreciation they deserve. We argue that we need both, grand visions and small practical steps, to move forward and advance science communication, to make sure that the benefits of future breakthroughs are not offset by our inefficiency in communicating them.




# Comments

A pragmatic cell type definition is necessary for genuine semantic publishing of claims about cell types.