
Differentiation dynamics of mammary epithelial cells revealed by single-cell RNA sequencing.
============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q47122082]  
  
Publication date : 11 of December, 2017  

# Highlights

. Our analysis of 23,184 cells identifies 15 clusters, few of which could be fully
characterised by a single marker gene. We argue instead that the epithelial cells—especially
in the luminal compartment—should rather be conceptualised as being part of a continuous
spectrum of differentiation

--> "should be conceptualised as being part of a continuous
spectrum of differentiation" in human minds, ok. But what about knowledge systems?

Here we used single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNAseq) to map
the cellular dynamics of mammary epithelial cells across four
adult developmental stages; nulliparous, mid gestation, lactation
and post weaning (full natural involution)

Reconstruction of the luminal differentiation hierarchy. We
focused on cells from the NP and G time points to investigate
mammary epithelial differentiation states of the gland. These
differentiation states and the transitions between them can be
computationally reconstructed using diffusion maps

. On the right arm of the
differentiation trajectory, cells from C6 transitioned to C2 and
C4/5 (Hsp and Hsd), during which the expression of Esr1 and Pgr
increased suggesting that this branch represents differentiation
towards hormone-sensing luminal cells (Fig. 3c).

We have reported here the use of single cell RNA sequencing to
comprehensively map the transcriptomes of thousands of mammary epithelial cells across four developmental time points. Our
analysis identified 15 clusters of epithelial cells, some of which are
only present during specific developmental stage.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q47122082)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47122082)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q47122082&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41467-017-02001-5)  
