tmVar 2.0: integrating genomic variant information from literature with dbSNP and ClinVar for precision medicine.
=================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q47317210]  

# Highlights

Automatic method to extract and normalize variant mentions to unique identifiers (dbSNP RSIDs).

Each SNP record in dbSNP is assigned a stable and unique variant accession identifier, known as RS number (RSID)

ClinVar is another NCBI database which collects and reports relationships between human variation and phenotype for a subset of dbSNP

Extended tmVar to automatically normalize the variant mentions and map them to standard dbSNP RS numbers.

To our best knowledge, we are the first to analyze and integrate literature-mined variant information with existing data in dbSNP and ClinVar. 

It detects terms that represent variants of multiple types (SNV, inser- tion, deletion, etc.) and sequence context (genomic, transcript and protein) and returns its results in HGVS form

we first built a comprehensive lexicon containing all possible mappings be- tween variant mentions and RSIDs,

Pattern Matching: We developed a set of patterns (e.g.‘[Gene/Protein] ([DNAMutation] with [RSID])’) to detect a pair of mutation and RSID co-occurring in the same sentence. 

One variation is commonly mapped to multiple RSIDs, a disambiguation step is required to select the correct RSID from the list of candidates. For disambiguation, we used global information in the entire article and/or variant-associated gene information. if any of the candidate RSIDs appeared in the article, we would return that RS number.

We believe our analysis demonstrates our text mining results to be useful for enriching literature links in existing databases and assisting the curation and prioritization of clinically important variants.

### Comments
Many databases for snps and gene-disease associations.

# Comments
