
Swiss-Prot: juggling between evolution and stability.
=====================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q47579749]  

# Highlights

explore some ofthe consequences of decisions taken about 20 years ago, to discuss how the database has constantly evolved and to describe the challenges that it currently faces.


before we do so, we want to enumerate six observations that we believe are important to communicate to any would-be developers ofsuch databases:


You will always wonder why life scientists abhor complying with nomenclature guidelines or standardisation efforts that would
simplify your and their life.
As with any service efforts, you will be told far more what you do wrong rather than what you do right.
But when you will see how useful your efforts are to your users, all the above drawbacks will lose their importance!


in 1985, one ofus (Amos Bairoch) was, in the context ofa PhD thesis, developing a software package (PC/Gene5) to analyse protein sequences. In mid-1986, the first release of Swiss-
Prot came out.


Swiss-Prot annotators are aware ofthis heterogeneity and know what data can be more or less trusted. We currently observe that in 7.1 per cent of our entries we disagree with the translation provided by the submitter.


Fifteen years ago, Swiss-Prot annotators typically went through the following process: they photocopied all relevant papers from the reference list ofthe entry they were annotating. The publications were read and important information was marked in the paper copy.


We currently receive about 300 update requests for Swiss-Prot entries per year, a number that we would very much like to see growing in the future!


Yet, after years of discussions with researchers, we believe that the root of the project is ofa sociological nature. The career oflife scientists is driven by the famous ‘publish or perish’ injunction and submitting data to a database does not get any credit points on a CV. So we have to rely on the altruism ofsome individuals.


Many people are surprised to hear that Swiss-Prot annotation is done from within a text editor.


Automatic annotation is far from being a novel concept. But what we want to achieve in Swiss-Prot differs from what others expect from such systems. Their aim is to analyse new genomic sequences and predict a maximum ofpotential information items so as to be able to infer hypotheses on the potential biological processes present in the organism. Our aim is to make sure that we produce high- quality annotation with a minimal amount ofincorrect inferences.


We know that many are apprehensive of the word ‘automation’ and are afraid that we will drown high-quality manually annotated entries with lower-quality ‘automated’ entries. We are very aware of this danger and are almost paranoid in our effort to ensure that automatic annotation will produce data of a quality up to that of manual curation.


We need to state here that if physicists or chemists behaved like biologists, we would probably live in a world without computers or plastic (this may sound like an attractive proposition to some!). Life scientists do not receive, during their training, the perception of the importance offollowing nomenclature rules.

Being a well-established database, we can say that the tireless effort ofjuggling between evolution and stability has been an exhausting but suitable strategy for the development ofthe Swiss-Prot protein knowledgebase.


# Comments
