
The Human Cell Atlas: from vision to reality.
=============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q47565008]  

# Highlights

As an ambitious project to map all the cells in the human body gets officially under way, Aviv Regev, Sarah Teichmann and colleagues outline some key challenges.

For more details on how the atlas will be built as an open global resource, see the white paper posted on the Human Cell Atlas website.

In cellular taxonomy, it might enable the discovery and identification of cell types and molecular markers or signatures (a collection of genes, say, that characterize a specific cell type).

“To have maximum impact, the Human Cell Atlas must be an open resource, on multiple levels.”

The first draft of the atlas will profile cells’ molecular and spatial characteristics, capturing only those cell types that occur above a pre-specified rarity — ones that make up more than 1% of a sample, say.

A similar step-wise strategy was deployed in the Human Genome Project; even a partially assembled genome proved immediately useful to researchers, and human genetic variation in health and disease was tackled over several years after the full genome was sequenced. 

As much as possible, the atlas must reflect the diversity of humans and human experience.

Descriptors such as ‘cell type’ and ‘cell state’ can be difficult to define at the moment. An integrative, systematic effort by many teams of scientists working together and bringing different expertise to the problem could dramatically sharpen our terminology, and revolutionize the way we see our cells, tissues and organs. We invite you to join the effort.

--> Cool, explicit call for terminology improvement. Good for 1.4. The challenges of the Human Cell Atlas, core for 2.4 The concept of "cell type"



# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q47565008)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47565008)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q47565008/P921%3BP4510)  
