
A single-cell survey of the small intestinal epithelium.
========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q47564808]  
  
Publication date : 08 of November, 2017  

# Highlights

Here we report profiling of 53,193 individual epithelial cells from the small intestine and organoids of mice, which enabled the identification and characterization of previously unknown subtypes of intestinal epithelial cell and their gene signature

 Sct, which is reported14 to be produced solely by S cells, was expressed by cells in all mature enteroen-docrine cell subsets (Fig. 3c); Cck, the canonical marker for I cells, was expressed in five subsets. This pattern was concordant in full-length scRNA-seq data (Extended Data Fig. 5b

 We therefore concatenated the annotation for previously defined sub-sets; for example: cells that express Sct, Cck, Gcg and Ghrl are termed SILA (Fig. 3c) Several hormones were subset-specific (Fig. 3c and Extended Data Fig. 6c): galanin (Gal) to SILA,  neurotensin (Nts) to SIN, nucleobindin 2 (Nucb2) to SIK, and amylin (or islet  amyloid polypeptide, Iapp) and somatostatin (Sst) to SAKD.

Unexpectedly, Ptprc, which encodes the pan-immune marker CD45, was expressed strongly and exclusively by tuft-2 cells (Fig. 4d–f, Extended Data Fig. 7h). Tuft-2 cells were consistently strongly enriched in drop-let-based 3′  scRNA-seq of EpCAM+/CD45+ cells (n=   3  mice; Fig. 4g, Extended Data Fig. 7i, Methods). To our knowledge, this is the first find-ing of CD45+ cells from a non-haematopoietic lineage, highlighting the challenges of associating individual markers with specific cell popula-tions, even when the markers for a given cell type are well established.

The microfold cell signature confirmed that microfold cells from Peyer’s patches were too rare to detect without specific enrichment of follicle-associated epithelia (only 1 of 7,216 cells in our initial sampling (Fig. 1b) was positive). Discovering any other, as yet unknown, subsets of rare cells would require additional stratification.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q47564808)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47564808)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q47564808/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q47564808&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
