
Body cell mass: model development and validation at the cellular level of body composition.
===========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q47579411]  

# Highlights

THE CONCEPT OF BODY CELL MASS (BCM), as proposed in 1963 by
Moore et al. (15), reflects the cellular components of the body
involved in biochemical processes and energy metabolism.
BCM consists of the nonfat cellular portion of tissues, such as
skeletal muscle, viscera, organs, blood, and brain

Moore et al. (15) developed a BCM estimation formula of
the general type
BCM kg  k  Ke mmol (1)
where Ke is total body exchangeable potassium measured by 42K, and k (in kg/mmol) is the reciprocal of the potassium
content of BCM. This model assumes that there is negligible
extracellular fluid (ECF) potassium, all exchangeable potassium is within cells, and that the average cell potassium content
is constant.

Cohn et al. (4) were the first investigators to experimentally
estimate BCM independent of TBK. BCM was derived by
application of early fat-free mass (FFM) models on the molecular and cellular body composition levels that incorporated
several measured components, including total body nitrogen
(TBN), total body water (TBW), total body calcium, and total
body chlorine

In the present study, we critically reviewed and
refined earlier approaches for estimating BCM. Our findings
show close concord among three approaches for estimating the
central BCM prediction model component k [i.e., 1/(TBK/
BCM)] value: 0.00918  0.00091 kg/mmol for experimental
data


# Comments
Too specific


## Tags
2.3
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q47579411)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47579411)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q47579411/P921%3BP4510)  
