
Automating drug discovery.
==========================
  
  [@wikidata:Q47780833]  
  
Publication date : 15 of December, 2017  

# Highlights

Given the vast size (cardinality) of the
relevant ‘chemical space’, which is estimated
to be in the range of 1030–1060 drug-like
molecules, the key challenge for medicinal
chemists could be summed up as ‘what
to make and test next?’ Automated drug
discovery platforms must be able to provide
the right answers to this question.

clustering and regression methods (for
example, nearest neighbour approaches,
support vector machines, standard neural
networks and decision trees). The successes
of these methods in activity prediction
and lead suggestion are, in part, due to
the development of useful, often domainspecific, molecular representations, which
enable comparably simple machine learning
architectures to make reasonable predictions.
In the process of engineering and applying
these descriptor systems, we include a
measure of our chemical knowledge and
understanding in the depiction of the
actuality of these molecules. 


There is no doubt that the automation
of science has already begun. The use of
robotic devices is not limited to improving
the reproducibility of experiments; a
particular feature of ‘robot scientists’ is their
explicit foundation of scientific reasoning,
which contrasts with the more polymorphic,
generalized human mind222. The key
technology drivers are hardware and
software improvements and data availability

# Comments
No mention of biocuration and ontologies.

## Tags
1.1.1. Literature Based Discovery, hidden knowledge and text-mining

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q47780833)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47780833)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q47780833/P921%3BP4510)  
