
A subcellular map of the human proteome.
========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q48155823]  
  
Publication date : 11 of May, 2017  

# Highlights

Here, we present a comprehensive image-based map of the
subcellular protein distribution, the Cell Atlas, built by integrating transcriptomics and antibody-based
immunofluorescence microscopy with validation by mass spectrometry. 

By integration of transcriptomics data and an antibody-based image profiling
approach, we provide experimental localization data for
12,003 proteins using a panel of 22 human cell lines and
13,993 antibodies. 

The Cell Atlas aims to define the proteome of organelles and
subcellular compartments by IF imaging (Fig. 1)

--> Cool! It looks like it is an "organelle type" atlas, and the "Cell Atlas" is referring to actual cells, and not cell types


 The images and the primary data are presented in the Cell Atlas in
a gene-centric manner, including the classification of all
images and a description of the validation and reliability of
the antibodies and identified locations. Furthermore, the
images were annotated by a Citizen Science approach
through “Project Discovery” within EVE online, a massive
multiplayer online game, resulting in more than 7 million
minutes of active participation from over 180,000 players
across the world to date. Altogether, the Cell Atlas (version
16.1 of the Human Protein Atlas) contains 82,152 highresolution annotated images covering 61% of all the human
protein-coding genes and 73% of the genes expressed in the
IF cell line panel. 
  
-->  3.2.2. Community curation and gamified science

In the Cell Atlas we provide a reliability score for every annotated location and protein at a four-tiered scale: “validated”, “supported”, “approved” and “uncertain”.

 Most proteins of the Cell Atlas are
found in the nucleoplasm and its substructures (6,245). The
number of nuclear proteins exceeds previously identified
numbers considerably


The goal of proteomic studies lies in the large-scale localization of novel proteins to achieve a complete picture of
organelle function. IF-images are in particular advantageous
in the identification of protein constituents of compartments that are challenging to purify or have distinct substructures. For example, specialized domains within a
compartment such as cell junctions in the plasma membrane are easily visible in IF, like the uncharacterized protein C4orf19 (Fig. 2D). Other compartments such as the
cytokinetic bridge correspond to a rare cellular event and
are thus challenging for proteomic studies. However, with
our high-resolution images we could not only identify 88
proteins located to the cytokinetic bridge (Fig. 2E), but also
analyze the underlying components midbody (36 proteins,
Fig. 2F) and midbody ring (12 proteins, Fig. 2G).

--> Gosh, I have no idea what a cytokinetic bridge is! 

The Cell Atlas data were compared against a high-resolution
spatial protein map generated by a mass spectrometrybased method, called hyperplexed localization of organelle
proteins by isotope tagging (hyperLOPIT). HyperLOPIT
aims to resolve all subcellular compartments in a single experiment by combining biochemical cell fractionation with
quantitative mass spectrometry and robust multivariate statistical analysis 

--> Dope!
In a pilot to this study (15), we concluded that many of the
studied proteins were not restricted to a single organelle,
but localized to one or more additional locations. 


We examined whether existing protein-protein interaction networks would benefit from a more comprehensive
annotation of a protein’s subcellular location, as it constrains the possible number of interaction partners. The
localization data was integrated as spatial boundaries to the
human interactome that was recently used to systemically
uncover the molecular background of human diseases (45). 

Here we present the most comprehensive map of the subcellular distribution of the human proteome, generated by
high-resolution IF images on a single-cell level. The results
are presented in an interactive resource, the Cell Atlas, as
part of the Human Protein Atlas portal
(www.proteinatlas.org)

Taken together, the proteome of a single cell is compartmentalized and spatiotemporally regulated to a high
degree. Protein expression and localization change over
time and enable the cell to react to intrinsic or extrinsic factors. Although only presenting a snapshot of the current
state for a few cells, our single-cell analysis gives insight to
this dynamic process. The high-resolution map of the subcellular localization of 12,003 human proteins provided by
the Cell Atlas represents a key resource for a comprehensive
understanding of the human cell and its complex underlying molecular machinery, as well as a major step toward
modeling the human cell.

Fig. 1. Subcellular locations in the
Cell Atlas. (A)

--> All good concepts for Wikdiata
# Comments

Parallel and antecedents of HCA. 
The concept of "organelles" seems less than trivial too.

--> Hmmm, this protein-organelle information would be nice on Wikidata, he.

Maybe a "has_part" linking organelle to protein would be an okayish modelling. 


## Tags
1.4.1. The Human Cell Atlas project and its scope
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q48155823)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q48155823)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q48155823/P921%3BP4510)  
