
Microglia development follows a stepwise program to regulate brain homeostasis.
===============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q48659057]  
  
Publication date : 23 of June, 2016  

# Highlights

Microglia, as the residentmyeloid cells of the central nervous system, playan important role in life-long brain mainte-nance and in pathology.


Global profiles of transcriptionalstates indicated that microglia developmentproceeds through three distinct temporal stages,which we define as early microglia (until em-bryonic day 14), pre-microglia (from embry-onic day 14 to a few weeks after birth), and adultmicroglia (from a few weeks after birth on-ward

 Thisoriginal pool of cells is the only source of myeloidcells in the healthy brain (10,11). Other myeloidcells, such as bone marrow–derived monocytes,only infiltrate the brain under pathological cir-cumstances (6,12–14).


Microglia modulate synaptic transmission, forma-tion, and elimination and shape embryonic andpostnatal brain circuits (25–31). However, many ofthese processes, such as synaptic pruning andneuronal maturation, peak in mice during thefirst week after birth—aperiodthathasnotpre-viously been profiled in microglia


Early microglia were asso-ciated with genes involved in cell cycling anddifferentiation, such asMcm5andDab2(37). Incontrast,Csf1, Cxcr2, and other genes involved inneuronal development peaked in expression a few days before birth and decreased by adult-hood. Canonical adult microglia genes, includingCd14andPmepa1, were primarily expressed onlyin adult microglia.

Clustering analysis of 2831 single-cell profiles(696 from the yolk sac stage, 734 from the earlymicroglia stage, 705 

We found that Mcm5, Csf1,and Maf Bwere en-riched in CX3CR1+microglia cells from the early-,pre-, and adult-stage brain, respectively from the pre-microglia stage,and 696 from the adult microglia stage) 

Germ-free mice contain microglia withan underdeveloped adult phenotype

. Overall,microglia from mice subjected to MIA and ana-lyzed at the pre-microglia stage were transcription-ally shifted toward a more advanced developmentalstage. We propose that such disruptions in theprecise timing of microglia development may per-turb their physiological functions in the develop-ing brain and may explain neurodevelopmentaldiseases in later stages of development, long afterthe microglia phenotype is restore

A) Normalized profiles of H3K4me2 and ATAC-seq signals in 100–kilobase(kb) regions from yolk sac progenitors (E12.5; light blue), early microglia (E12.5; blue), pre-microglia (P1; green), and adult microglia (8 weeks;red). Arrows beneatheach panel indicate gene location. Gray shading highlights differential chromatin regions
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q48659057)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q48659057)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q48659057/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q48659057&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.AAD8670)  
