
Cell ontology in an age of data-driven cell classification.
===========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q49192555]  

# Highlights


Data-driven cell classification is becoming common and is now being implemented on a massive scale by projects such as the Human Cell Atlas?
 How will data from the various types of single cell analysis be made cross-searchable?


Focusing on examples from the mouse retina and Drosophila olfactory system, I present worked examples illustrating how formalization of cell ontologies can enhance querying of data-driven cell-classifications and how ontologies can be extended by integrating the outputs of data-driven cell classifications


Data driven classification of cell types via unsupervised or semi-supervised clustering is becoming common


NBLAST is already in use as a query tool allowing users to use a suitably- prepared neuron image to query for neurons with simi- lar morphology, with results ranked, as for BLAST, using a similarity score.

this work faces a problem, especially when carried
out on a scale as large as the Human Cell Atlas. How can the results be made searchable and accessible to bi-
ologists in general? How can they be related back to the rich classical knowledge of cell-types, anatomy and development?


It is, of course, not always clear precisely what known cell type, if any, corresponds to a single cell whose image or transcriptome we have or corresponds to a cluster of simi- lar cells predicted by unsupervised clustering. In this case, ontologies can be a source of more general cell classifications that may applicable (lymphocyte; cortical interneuron; epithelial cell).

In as far as these ontologies accurately record nomen- clature, classification and part relationships to anatomy they are ideally suited to provide a mechanism for anno- tation of single-cell experiments. But cell ontologies will only be able to play this role if they are sufficiently accurate, flexible and scalable enough to keep up with the flood of new data.

A single neuron may be classified by structure (pseudo-bipolar), electrophysi- ology (spiking), neurotransmitter (glutamatergic), sen- sory modality (secondary olfactory neuron), location(s) within the brain (antennal lobe projection neuron, mushroom body extrinsic neuron), etc. But manually maintaining these multiple axes of classification simply doesn’t scale: adding new terms requires (human) edi- tors to know all of the appropriate classifications to add and how to rearrange existing classifications to fit the new term. It also requires them to understand the intent behind existing manually asserted classifications, which is typically partially documented at best.

_Mismatch between quantified logic, which records assertions about all members of a class, and the messy, noisy reality of biology and the data we collect about it._

Here I present two case studies of how formalizing cell ontologies and using them to annotate the results of single cells analysis can improve the searchability and query-ability of the single cell data. In both cases I explore how we might use the outputs of single-cell analysis to extend cell ontologies and link them to data that can be used for data-driven queries for cell types.

A complete connectome for a single region of the mouse retina provides connectomic profiles and circuit context for over 400 RBCs [7]. A classification derived from unsupervised clustering of 25,000 single mouse RPC transcriptomes by Shekhar and colleagues [1] found 15 cell types distinguishable by transcriptome.

Classification of retinal bipolar cells in the cell ontology. Note that general types (rod, cone, ON, OFF) are non-species specific, whereas specific types are specified for mouse. This is necessary because morphologically defined classes vary between species.

Where multiple markers of a cell types are identified multiple equivalence-axioms could be added. This process of generating equivalence axioms could po- tentially be automated using mappings of cell ontology terms to data-derived clusters.

The examples given here are well axiomatised, but the degree of effort put in to axiomatising will, of course, de- pend on use cases and resources in individual projects

The combination of equiva- lence and subclassing (restriction) axioms generates hidden General Class Inclusion axioms – logically associating sets of properties with each other in a way that can be hard to keep track of.


Thomas Gruber’s ‘principle of minimal commitment’
[26] is particularly relevant to this discussion. This principle suggests that:
“An ontology should require the minimal ontological commitment sufficient to support the intended knowledge sharing activities. A shared ontology need only describe a vocabulary for talking about a domain whereas a knowledge base may include the knowledge needed to solve a problem or answer arbitrary queries about a domain.”

Where more precise annotation of cell-type is possible, linking cell-types to data that can be used in data-driven queries can help users find potential matches and is potentially a source of automated annotation.

Formalization is needed to support multiple inheritance classification querying and automated classification of individuals from annotation. Successful formalization re- quires the development of clear, well documented design patterns in which equivalent class axioms are kept minimal – with clear aims in mind for use.

# Comments

"The combination of equivalence and subclassing (restriction) axioms generates hidden General Class Inclusion axioms – logically associating sets of properties with each other in a way that can be hard to keep track of"

--> Solution: bottom up classification starting with the most specific. 


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q49192555)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q49192555)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q49192555/P921%3BP4510)  
