
Cross-linking BioThings APIs through JSON-LD to facilitate knowledge exploration.
=================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q49483648]  

# Highlights
Here, we have implemented JSON for Linking Data (JSON-LD) technology on the BioThings APIs that we have developed, MyGene.info, MyVariant.info and MyChem.info. JSON-LD provides a standard way to add semantic context to the existing JSON data structure

JSON for Linking Data (JSON-LD) has been a W3C (World Wide Web Consortium) recommendation since 2014 to promote interoperability among JSON-based web services. JSON-LD as an official W3C standard has been well accepted and adopted, especially within the Internet of Things community.

It would be extremely useful for JSON documents to be “self-describing” in the sense that providers can explicitly define the semantic meaning of each key.


For example, a user who would like to fetch the linked OMIM [15]disease IDs for a specific variant in MyVariant.info must first consult the JSON data schema, which would define the JSON field path of the OMIM ID (“clinvar.rcv.conditions.identifiers.omim”).

JSON-LD context can be queried based on concept URIs in a way that is completely independent of the JSON data structure. In the example above, a user can simply query by the URI for OMIM ID (“http://iden- tifiers.org/omim/”).

we are expanding the scope of BioThings API to cover additional biomedical en- tities (e.g. diseases, phenotypes)

several biomedical tool providers have already introduced JSON-LD in their APIs, including Monarch Initiative [26], CEDAR [28], and UniProt [29].

We believe that the proof-of-concept presented here dem- onstrates that the JSON-LD pattern already has useful ap- plications, and that adoption of this pattern would greatly expand the interoperability of biomedical web services
# Comments
