
A molecular atlas of cell types and zonation in the brain vasculature.
======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q50001722]  
  
Publication date : 14 of February, 2018  

# Highlights

While specialization of the vascular endothelium is known to be a key feature of the BBB, the contribution of vascular mural cells (pericytes and smooth muscle cells (SMCs)) and vessel-associated cell types such as astrocytes is less clear.

Pericyte identification is problematic owing to a lack of spe-cific markers14, and criteria for pericyte definition remain debated15.

 Primary bar-plot data and aver-age expression scores for the cell types (Extended Data Fig. 2a) are available gene-by-gene at http://betsholtzlab.org/VascularSingleCells/database.html

 In addition to endothelial and mural cells, we obtained clusters corre-sponding to astrocytes, oligodendrocyte precursors (Pdg fra+), inter-mediate stage oligodendrocytes (Opalin+)18, perivascular (Mrc1+) and interstitial (Cx3cr1+) microglia17,19 and two types of fibroblast-like cells (Extended Data Fig. 2b–d)

 As examples of how specific gene or protein classes distribute along the arteriovenous axis, we found zonal and nested distribution of 120 transcription factor transcripts and 145 transmembrane trans-porter transcripts (Extended Data Fig. 6b, c), providing insight into transcriptional regulation of arteriovenous zonation and how this results in endothelial specialization.

See Extended Data Fig. 1 for cell type abbreviations. c, More cell type-specific markers used for cluster annotation. See http://betsholtzlab.org/VascularSingleCells/database.htmlfor high-resolution images and statistics.

Zonal expression of transcripts across endothelial cells sorted by SPIN. b, Left, heat map of relative gene expression (red, high; blue, low) reveals six major patterns: artery (A; 1 and 2), vein (V; 3), artery and vein (A+V; 4), capillary (Cap; 5) and vein and capillary (V+Cap; 6)

--> - 2.4.7.5 Differentia for cell classes: presence in organ
--> 2.4.7.5 Differentia for cell classes: sub-organ regions

 Notably, aSMCs were enriched for expression of immediate early genes (IEGs), including Fos, Fosb, Jun, Junb and Egr1 ( Extended Data Fig. 7e), which may reflect a rapid (within minutes) response of aSMCs to removal of natural physical conditions such as high shear and pressure.

 for a first insight into pericyte organotypicity, we identified pericytes in the adult lung of Pdg frb-GFP mice as strongly GFP-positive cells located on alveolar capillaries (Fig. 4a) and isolated these cells for scRNA-seq. Altogether, about 1,500 lung cells were sequenced and clustered by BackSPIN.

A noticeable difference between brain and lung pericytes involved the SLC, ABC and ATP transporters, many of which (for example, Atp13a5) were abundant in brain pericytes (Extended Data Fig. 9d, e) but low or absent in lung pericytes (Fig. 4b). 

 --> - 2.4.7.5 Differentia for cell classes: presence in organ

 However, the brain FB cells also expressed the endothelial marker Cdh5, the epithelial marker Lama1 and the mesothelial marker Efemp1, suggesting that they may have mixed mesenchymal and epithelial characteristics (Extended Data Fig. 11b and http://betsholtzlab.org/VascularSingleCells/database.html).

 Here, we have provided molecular definitions of the principal classes of brain vascular cells through their genome-wide quantitative transcriptomes

 . For these conditions, our data pinpoint pericytes and fibroblast-like cells as common cellular culprits besides endothelial cells (Extended Data Fig. 12), suggesting that cellular involvement in neurovascular pathologies is more complex than anticipated

 h, The resulting simplified tree, which also shows the final cell type annotation that is used to display the data throughout the paper and at http://betsholtzlab.org/VascularSingleCells/database.html. 

 --> Damn, it is not a tree!
 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q50001722)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q50001722)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q50001722/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q50001722&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/NATURE25739)  
