
Numerical taxonomy.
===================
  
  [@wikidata:Q50735370]  

# Highlights
a brief criticism of phylogenetic systematics, a first publication of the theoretical justification of namerical taxonomy and a sumunary of the techniques proposed in this field

The sudden resurgence of these ideas and methods some six years ago is probably dus te the increasing availability of electronic digital computers, since these are in practice essential for handling the simple but extensive computations which are needed, We have named this fleld ‘numerical taxonomy’,
which may be defined as ‘the numerical evaluation of the affinity or similarity between taxonomic unite and the ordering of these wnite into taxa on the basis of their affinities’.

--> Current cell type classifications schemes, data-driven if you will, are just rebrandings of numerical taxonomy

This implies among other things that in constructing general classifications characters have oqual weightt' and thet taxa are based on correlations between features. These two postulates are commonly called Adansonian, after the eighteenth-century French botanists, Adanson. Natural taxonomic groups are of the class of concepts which Beckuer! has called “nolytypie’”’ (better terrsed polythetic}, in which no single attribute is in theory sufficient and necessary for membership in the group so long as the members share a high proportion of charactors.

In recent years a number of authors have pointed ont the logical fallasies underlying attempts to force phylogenetic criteria, on to taxonomic groupings, oF of arriving at taxonomies based on phylogenstic doductions. The proponenis of numerical taxonomy consequently insist on the separation of the taxonornic process (which is to be based on affinity or resem- blancs) from phylogenetic speculations.

‘The aim of orthodox taxonomy is to yield taxonomic groups which bring together organisms with the highest proportion of similar attributes. This is the logical basis of what we somewhat loosely call ‘natural’ taxa, for it enables us to make the greatest number of generalizations about the organ- isms which are grouped inte one taxon'-?,

Phenetic classification. Nurnerical taxonomy practises the strict separation of phylogenetic speculation fromtaxonomic procedure. Taxonomic relationships are to be evaluated purely om the basis of the re- semblance existing in the material at hand, The relationships are therefore static, as Michener®® has called them, or, as we now prefer to call thern, phonetic".

The earher dictum that taxa should be mono- phyletic groups is no longer strictly observed, as, for example, in the class Mammalia®*, which represent an essentially phenetic taxon. We believe that most phenetic taxa will also be monophyletic, but would uot be concerned if they were not. Suppose an absurdly extreme overall convergence had occurred so that two forras were almnost indistinguishable and could readily and successfully hybridize: what is the purpose of separating them on prounds of ancestry when in all other attributes they are virtually the same ?

- the ‘nexus hypothesie’, which assumes that every taxonomic character is Hkely to be affected by more than one genetic factor and that conversely most gones affect more than one character, regulting in a complicated nexus of cause and effect.

After & certain number of characters have been recorded the inclusion of further characters will become un- profitable frorn the point of view of classification. While we have theoretical grounds for helieving that this hypothesis is true, yet we would need a very large number of characters to approach the asymp- tate

Characters can be of different kinds, such us length of an organ (which can bo divided into several classes or states), or the form of margin of a leaf (the states of which may be serrate, undulate, entire amd so on) or the presence or absence of am attribute (such as ability to Aly).

Characters should be unit characters. A working definition of a ‘unit character’ would be ‘a taxonomic character of two or more states, which within the study at hand
cannot be further subdivided logically.

The similarity coefficients are estimates of the phonetic resernblance between the taxonomic entities.
They are tabulated in a table containing rows and » eclummns for » taxa, with unity {or sero) in the principal diagonal, so that
the matrix lists the similarity coefficient for svery taxon compared with every other. These primary taxonomic entities may be taxa
such as species, or im some in- stances individuals, which may be used as oxernplars of taxonomic groups. They are referred to as ‘operational taxonomic unit’.

Phenons. Flow should we uarne the groups which are established by numerical taxonomy ? We can, if we wish, equate themwith genera, tribes, or families, but sinco those terms have ovolutionary, nomoncla- tural and other connotations, we prefer te uso new expressions. We call the groups simply “phenons’ aud preface them with a mumber indicating the level of similarity at which they were formed.

Phenons are groups which approach natural daxe, rnore or less closely, and Uke the termtaxon, they can be of any rank.

Has numorical taxonomy nothing to say regarding phylogenetics ? Woe believe that it will have, though this is still an wnexplered field. Qur present aim is to raake stable phonetic groups; but these results can be used for phylogenetic purposes.

How practical is numerical taxonomy? Can practising taxonomists use it to-day ? The answer is definitely yes.

The role of the computer in numorical taxonomy is not to replace taxonomists, but to leave thermfree time for the collection of new data and the evaluation of the results of the computations.
# Comments
