
A comprehensive map coupling histone modifications with gene regulation in adult dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons.
=======================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q51415870]  
  
Publication date : 26 of March, 2018  

# Highlights
Here, using a strategy that
allows for ChIP-seq combined with RNA-seq in small neuronal populations in vivo, we pre-
sent a comparative analysis of permissive and repressive histone modiﬁcations in adult
midbrain dopaminergic neurons, raphe nuclei serotonergic neurons, and embryonic neural
progenitors.

Midbrain dopamine-producing neurons (mDA neurons)
control vital brain functions but only exist in numbers, nearly 50-
fold lower (20,000–30,000 cells per mouse) than those required
for a single conventional ChIP-seq analysis

Notably, subtype restricted loss of H3K27me3 in
adult medium spiny neurons (MSNs) leads to derepression of
genes associated with other lineages, along with apoptosis genes,
eventually leading to neurodegeneration

To understand how silencing of developmental genes is reﬂected
by histone modiﬁcation redistribution in mDA neurons, we
compared expression data between mDA neurons and NPCs.
This showed that 3889 genes were differentially expressed
between NPCs and mDA neurons (Fig. 3a). ChIP-seq in NPCs for
H3K27me3, H3K4me3, and H3K9me3 revealed that the abun-
dance of H3K27me3 and H3K9me3 within promoter regions ±10
kb surrounding the TSS of genes in NPCs was inversely correlated
with abundance of H3K4me3 (Supplementary Figure 6a).

Subtype-speciﬁc chromatin landscapes deﬁne adult neurons. It
has been assumed that the maintenance of neuronal subtype
identity is obtained by a combinatory action of speciﬁc tran-
scription factors and cell-type-speciﬁc distribution of facultative
heterochromatin 2 . Yet, the extent of H3K27me3 and H3K9me3
contribution to cell fate restriction is largely unknown

Furthermore, such an effort would reveal if PRC2-associated gene
silencing indeed is required for maintenance of cellular identity in
these cell types.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q51415870)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q51415870)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q51415870&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41467-018-03538-9)  
