
Using statistical and knowledge-based approaches for literature-based discovery.
================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q51953854]  
  
Publication date : 04 of January, 2006  

# Highlights

In this paper, we present a literature-based discovery system called LitLinker that incorporates knowledge-based methodologies with a statistical method to mine the biomedical literature for new, potentially causal connections between biomedical terms. 

In our evaluation, we measured LitLinker’s ability to capture novel and interesting connections between diseases and chemicals, drugs, genes, or molecular sequences from the biomedical literature. 

For the term that is provided, LitLinker identifies all documents in MEDLINE that contain that term and gathers all the MeSH terms used in that collection of documents. The terms are pruned and correlated terms are identified using the process described in Section 3.2.

In the rest of the paper, we use the term literature to define the set of documents categorized under a given MeSH term with valid publication types.

For example, the correlation between migraine and pain was a strong one, because pain appeared in 301 documents of the migraine literature. However, it was not a very interesting connection because pain was a fairly generic term which appeared commonly with many other terms besides just migraine. In contrast, spreading cortical depression appeared in 92 documents of the migraine literature. Although, the correlation between migraine and spreading cortical depression was weaker than the correlation between migraine and pain, intuitively it was a more interesting correlation.

For the third problem, the challenge was to generate an automated, generalizable approach to pruning away those implausible and uninteresting terms. We used UMLS to solve this problem. In the UMLS, each term is connected through an isa link to one or more semantic types from a set of 135 general medical terms that the NLM calls the Semantic Network. For example, the term migraine has a semantic type of disease and syndrome, and the term magnesium has two semantic types of biologically active substance and element, ion, or isotope. LitLinker takes two sets of semantic types as input: one for linking term selection and one for target term selection. It eliminates any terms that do not match the corresponding semantic type criteria.

Recently, a group of researcher from NLM grouped semantic types under 15 more general headings that they call semantic groups [8]. Just as the semantic types provide a good summary for the biomedical terms, semantic groups provide a good summary for the semantic types. For example, one of the semantic types of magnesium is element, ion, or isotope and the semantic group of element, ion, or isotope is chemicals and drugs. 

Swanson and Smalheiser have made various discoveries by applying their literature-based discovery method to MEDLINE and published their results in the medical domain. Their discoveries have become gold standards for evaluation, and many researchers have measured the performance of their discovery systems by replicating Swanson’s discoveries and using the literatures published before the original discovery dates. 


Discovery example: The MeSH term endocannabinoids was one of the target terms identified by LitLinker for the starting term Alzheimer disease. It was connected to Alzheimer disease via the following nine linking terms:
• Basal Ganglia∗1

• Huntington disease

• Methoxyhydroxyphenylglycol

• Muscarinic agonists

• Neocortex

• Neuroprotective agents∗

• Neurotransmitters

• Piperidines

• Pyramidal cells∗

In this paper, we have shown that our mixed architecture of a statistical method based on word probability distributions and a knowledge-based approach can be incorporated into an effective system.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q51953854)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q51953854)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q51953854&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JBI.2005.11.010)  
