
What makes a gene name? Named entity recognition in the biomedical literature.
==============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q51955678]  

# Highlights

Information is often very difficult to achieve because it is mostly available only in the form offree text, ie in scientific publications, and not in structured databases. Since searching textual resources is much more difficult than searching structured databases, this information is often called ‘hidden’. One method to uncover such information hidden in free text is text mining.

Over the past years it has turned out that the recognition ofbiological objects in written language is very difficult due to many factors, including a general lack of naming conventions, excessive use of abbreviations, frequent usage ofsynonyms and homonyms, and the fact that biological objects often have names consisting ofmany single words, such as ‘human T-cell leukaemia lymphotropic virus type 1 Tax protein’. The latter example also shows that it is usually not clear where a name starts or ends, even for human readers. Many biologists would argue that the first word ‘human’ and the last word ‘protein’ are not part ofthe protein name itself, while others would claim the contrary.

NER tools can be applied to find all kinds ofentities, such as gene or protein names, diseases and drugs,20 mutations21 or properties ofprotein structures.22 However, most current systems concentrate on gene/protein names and do not distinguish between these two classes. Therefore, this paper also focuses on gene and protein names.

For most objects ofour daily language, there exists a social agreement on the nature ofreal-life concepts (what is a supermarket?), and on the way these concepts are represented in language (how do I name a supermarket?). However, in domains that are so quickly changing and highly specialised as molecular biology, such agreements do not have enough time to build or are subject to frequent modifications. As a consequence, both the real-life concepts and their textual representations are not unambiguously defined

fuzziness is a strength ofhuman language, not a weakness, since it allows us to communicate more concisely

--> I think it is both a strength and a weakness (tending more to the latter)

Gene names such as ‘white’ (symbol w), ‘shaggy’ (symbol ssg), or ‘mind the gap’ (symbol mtg) make it almost impossible to find gene-related articles using full-text search.

Even if gene name standards such as those set by the HUGO committee would be used more widely, the large amount of existing publications would still contain ‘old’ names.

Second, the mark-up of entity names in the gold standard greatly depends on the particular person performing the annotation. No biologist knows thousands ofgenes and protein names including all their synonyms, abbreviations and variants. Thus, even an expert will usually not find all names in a text.

Inter-annotator consistency was only measured on smaller corpora, and is reported as being between 75 and 90 per cent for gene and protein names.22,28 Considering that the best current NER systems reach an F-measure around 85 per cent, there is a real danger that all systems reporting better results will only represent an overfitting ofthe method to the particular gold standard, ie annotator.

Dictionary-based NER approaches match text against a fixed name list. To compensate, one can either use inexact matching techniques, or try to ‘fuzzify’ the dictionary by automatically generating typical spelling variants for every entry.

Rule-based NER systems use heuristic and machine-learned rules to identify names

For instance, surface clues (capital letters, symbols, digits) might be used to extract candidates for protein names.

Classification-based approaches 

The most popular technique in biomedical NER is to transform the NER task into a classification problem, either for single words or for multi-word phrases

NER remains a very important topic since text- mining applications will always perform only as well us the underlying NER methods. One interesting development in this area is the emerging interest of publishers. Ultimately, the NER problem might be solved not by sophisticated algorithms, but by journals forcing authors to tag entity names upon submission ofa manuscript.

However, even ifsuch tools were available, the problem of lacking standards for naming hundreds ofthousands of genes and proteins in many organisms remains open, as there will remain millions ofalready existing and untagged articles, containing the (hidden) knowledge of many decades of biomedical research.
# Comments 

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q51955678)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q51955678)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q51955678/P921%3BP4510)  
