
Cell type atlas and lineage tree of a whole complex animal by single-cell transcriptomics.
==========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q52315063]  
  
Publication date : 19 of April, 2018  

# Highlights

A cell type's transcriptome defines the active genes that control its biology. Two groups used single-cell RNA sequencing to define the transcriptomes for essentially all cell types of a complete animal, the regenerative planarian Schmidtea mediterranea. 

Fincher et al. determined the transcriptomes for most, if not all, planarian cell types, including some that were previously unknown.

To this end, we use single-cell transcriptomic approaches to improve our molecular understanding of how stem cells differentiate into the set of cell types that make an entire complex adult animal.

We have shown that it is possible to use single-cell transcriptomics to (i) build a cell atlas of an adult animal, (ii) reconstruct the lineage relationships of its cells in an unbiased way, and (iii) identify gene sets which likely contain genes that are involved in programming the lineage tree.

 Planarians are immortal, as they contain as adults a large pool of pluripotent stem cells (neoblasts) that continuously differentiate to all mature cell types to turn over all tissues (21). 


 l. The individual data sets correspond to five wild-type samples (10,866 cells), two RNA interference (RNAi) samples (3314 cells), a high-DNA content G2/M population corresponding to cycling planarian stem cells (typically defined as x-ray–sensitive “X1 cells”; 981 cells) 

 In the 1980s, Baguñà and Romero used microscopy to morphologically characterize and count all major cell types in S. mediterranea (30). We used this resource as a reference to validate the cell types identified by our Drop-seq data and cluster annotation.

 . We could confirm major known cell types such as different types of neurons, muscle, protonephridia, epidermis, and secretory cells. We identified the two main cell types of the planarian gut: phagocytes (Fig. 1D, red) and goblet cells (Fig. 1D, green), and discovered markers of planarian goblet cells, including a gene without apparent homologs in other phyla. We named this gene bruixot.

 Fig. 4 Consolidated lineage tree of planarian stem cell differentiation into all major types.
(A) Consolidated lineage tree including four independent sources of evidence. The topology of the tree is shown according to PAGA, and marker-based connections are shown with red edges. Velocyto-supported connections are shown with thick edges. Progenitor and differentiated cell clusters according to neoblast ablation and enrichment experiments are shown with yellow and blue halos, respectively. 

--> Nice image

Subsequently, we used self-organizing maps (SOMs) (46) to identify 48 sets of highly variable genes that coordinately change their expression during differentiation (47)

Cell type identification was performed by calculating marker genes for each cluster. Manual inspection, comparison to previously published single-cell data, and experimental validation using in situ hybridizations of the marker genes reported allowed the identification of the different cell populations. Additional characterization of the identified cell types was performed by characterizing GO-term–based gene sets with PAGODA (40). Experimental validation of cell types was done by whole-mount in situ hybridization and in situ hybridization on histological sections as previously described and using probes complementary to marker genes (table S9).
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q52315063)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q52315063)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q52315063/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://auth  or-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q52315063&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.AAQ1723)  
