
Community-driven roadmap for integrated disease maps.
=====================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q52311286]  
  
Publication date : 23 of April, 2018  

# Highlights

The Disease Maps Project builds on a network of scientific and clinical groups that exchange best practices, share informa-tion and develop systems biomedicine tools.

Expert-curated and computerreadable, disease maps may serve as a compendium of knowledge, allow for data-supported hypothesis generation orserve as a scaffold for the generation of predictive mathematical models. This article summarizes the 2nd Disease MapsCommunity meeting, highlighting its important topics and outcomes

The concept of disease maps emerged to bridge the domains ofbiological  and  computational  research  on  various  human  dis-orders.  In  essence,  these  maps  are  representations  of  diseasemechanisms that are both human and machine-readable [1–4].

--> Disease Maps representations - 1.3. Knowledge Representation in biology

For instance, ‘encoding and use of models’ needto  be  solved  at  the  levels  of  tools,  biocuration  and  modelingmethodology.  Complexity  management  and  tools  share  mile-stones for ‘dynamic network layout’, while biocuration and ap-plications both define ‘quality indicators of encoded knowledge’as a milestone

Visual  pathway  editors[13,17] that offer significant level of compatibility with SystemsBiology  Graphical  Notation  (SBGN)  [11]

A  milestone  on  the  road  toward  mechanistic,  modeling-oriented  curation  will  be  enabling  support  for  the  SystemsBiology Markup Language (SBML) [12] (see section ‘Use of mapsfor  mathematical  modeling’)  during  the  curation  of  diseasemaps.

 However,  an  open  issue  is  the  explorationand integration of simulation results from the associated mod-els. 
 
 Biocuration of a disease map is a difficult task that heavily de-pends on the expertise  of the curato
 
 Disease maps applications that focus on knowledge explorationrequire   easy   and   direct   access   to   various   data   resources.MINERVA and NaviCell platforms provide such access to a num-ber   of   annotation   sources,   like   HUGO   Gene   NomenclatureCommittee  (HGNC),  UniProt,  Chemical  Entities  of  BiologicalInterest (ChEBI),  PubChem or Gene Ontology  
 
The thematic highlight of the 2nd DMC meeting was mathemat-ical  modeling  and  disease  map

A. Z. challenged the possibility of immediate use of diseasemaps in mathematical modeling, suggesting that they are cur-rently  playing  a  role  of  interactive  encyclopedias  rather  thanblueprints  for  chemical  kinetics-based  modeling  of  large  reac-tion networks (structural network models). He argued that thedisease maps rather reflect our knowledge in the correspondingdomains  together  with  its  incompleteness  and  controversy.Thus, A. Z. coined a notion of executable encyclopedia as oppos-ite  to  structural  model,  as  a  hypothetical  approach  based  onpragmatic  middle-out  mathematical  modeling  as  opposite  tothe pure bottom-up approach.

--> That is an interesting view. AZ --> Andrei Zinovyev --> https://scholia.toolforge.org/author/Q41044623

 # Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q52311286)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q52311286)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q52311286/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q52311286&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/BIB/BBY024)  
