
A global network of biomedical relationships derived from text.
===============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q52681328]  

# Highlights
We used NCBI’s PubTator annotations to identify instances of chemical, gene and disease
names in Medline abstracts and applied the Stanford dependency parser to find connecting dependency paths between pairs of entities in single sentences. We combined a published ensemble biclustering algorithm (EBC) with hierarchical clustering to group the dependency paths into semanticallyrelated categories, which we annotated with labels, or "themes" ("inhibition” and “activation”, for example). We evaluated our theme assignments against six human-curated databases: DrugBank, Reactome, SIDER, the Therapeutic Target Database (TTD), OMIM, and PharmGKB.


The complete network is available on Zenodo (https://zenodo.org/record/1035500)

Fig. 1. Process of converting a sentence to a structured relationship. Step 1: Named
entity recognition. Step 2: Dependency parsing to produce dependency graph. Step 3:
Dependency path extraction from dependency graph. Step 4: Mapping of dependency
path to relationship data structure, which consists of the two entities, a direction, and a
structured "theme" that reflects the nature of the relationship between the two entities. The methods in this paper focus on Step 4.

ur approach uses distributional
semantics both to learn a schema and to map diverse surface forms onto
relational classes. It draws from ideas in biomedical ontology learning
(Liu 2011) and entailment recognition as well as relation extraction.

As in (Percha 2015), we eliminated paths containing dependencies of
type conj (two elements connected by a coordinating conjunction; De
Marneffe 2008b), because these were usually errors arising from how the
dependency parser represents lis

For each cluster, a set of 10 dependency paths was selected at random, and a human annotator examined the paths and several associated
example sentences from the literature to assign a label. Nearby clusters
sometimes shared similar themes, so we simplified the clusters into
thematically-related groups and assigned each theme a symbol. Supplement A contains the complete set of intermediate labels and sample
dependency paths for each cluste

We used known relationships from six human-curated databases to evaluate the validity of our themes.


Fig. 3a: Chemical-gene dendrogram. Each leaf node represents one dependency path.
In the example patterns above, C represents the chemical and G the gene/protein.

--> Very cool!

Our final dataset is a network with labeled, weighted edges. Because a
single dependency path can support multiple themes, the network is a
multigraph.

Table 3. Simplified relationship themes derived from the clusters shown in Figures
3a-d. 

--> As they are generally very useful, this is compatible with Wikidata.

The full network is available in two parts on Zenodo
(https://zenodo.org/record/1035500).
Part I connects dependency paths to themes. Each record contains a
dependency path followed by the supports for each theme, and indicators
for whether or not the path is part of the flagship path set for each theme.
Part II connects sentences to dependency paths. It consists of sentences and associated metadata, entity pairs found in the sentences.

Part II contains 4,451,661 records,
of which 92,465 (2.1%) represent chemical-gene dependency paths,
3,875,209 (87.1%) are chemical-disease paths, 338,306 (7.6%) are genedisease paths, and 145,681 (3.3%) are gene-gene paths

5.1 Summary of our approach and its advantages
We have constructed a labeled, weighted network of structured biomedical relationships for all Medline abstracts

 The most difficult and timeconsuming part of the process is the manual labeling of the clusters, and
this need only be performed once


Its most significant downside is that it relies on the co-occurrence of different dependency paths to map rarer paths to themes. There are a large number of dependency paths that (a) never co-occur with another path, and (b) occur with
only one entity pair

Finally, the named entity recognition provided by PubTator, while
state-of-the-art, is not perfect. While the multi-word entity recognition
provided by PubTator is a huge improvement over the simple lexicon
matching NER used in (Percha 2015), we have also observed several
situations where only parts of entity names are captured, or where entities are assigned to the wrong type (proteins labeled as chemicals, etc.).
However, we expect that NCBI will continue to refine its NER algorithms in the coming years


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q52681328)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q52681328)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q52681328/P921%3BP4510)  
