
A single-cell RNA-seq survey of the developmental landscape of the human prefrontal cortex.
===========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q52655768]  
  
Publication date : 14 of March, 2018  

# Highlights

ere we analyse more than 2,300 single cells in the developing human prefrontal cortex from gestational weeks 8 to 26 using RNA sequencing. We identify 35 subtypes of cells in six main classes and trace the developmental trajectories of these cells. Detailed analysis of neural progenitor cells highlights new marker genes and unique developmental features of intermediate progenitor cells.

The prefrontal cortex (PFC) covers the front of the frontal lobe of the brain in mammals and has important roles in memory, emotion, cognitive behaviour, decision-making and social behaviour1–4.   To   analyse the molecular features of cells in the PFC during human brain development, we obtained 2,309 single cells from human embryonic PFCs at gestational week

By analysing differentially expressed genes among the clusters (Fig. 1b, Supplementary Table 1), we identified SFRP1 and RBFOX1 as markers of NPCs 

Figure 1 | Molecular diversity of cells from the developing human PFC. a, Visualization of major classes of cells using t-SNE. Dots, individual cells; colour, gestational weeks (GW); colour contours, cell types. Right, expression of known markers; grey, no expression; yellow–red, relative expression. b, Hierarchical clustering analysis of 35 subclasses

 co-stained GW16 PFC for HOPX, SOX2 and NEUROD1, and observed that some HOPX+SOX2+ cells also expressed NEUROD1 in oSVZ (Extended Data Fig. 6d), indicating that these progenitors might undergo neurogenic cell division and the resulting neurons may retain markers from the pro-genitor cells. Consistent with this hypothesis, the gene ontology results indicated that the oRG cells in cluster 8 (GW9 to GW16) were actively proliferating, whereas the oRG cells in cluster 7 (GW16 to GW26) were undergoing neuronal differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 6a).

 Our data indicate that interneurons appear and mature later than excitatory neurons, and that this pattern is intrinsically regulated. Thus, transcriptome profiling of thousands of single cells in the devel-oping PFC is a powerful tool for investigating the mechanisms behind neurological diseases and exploring potential therapies
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q52655768)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q52655768)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q52655768/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q52655768&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/NATURE25980)  
