
Essentialism and nominalism in medicine: logic of diagnosis in disease terminology.
===================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q53618804]  
  
Publication date : 01 of August, 1996  

# Highlights


Realists believed
in the real existence of universals. Behind every definable
object or concept there lay an ideal form; the purpose of
definition was to describe this unchanging essence.
Because realism has a different meaning in another
philosophical context (the realism-idealism dichotomy),
Popper proposed essentialism as a better term by which to
refer to this view. Nominalists on the other hand held that
a universal was a name for a class of objects or events; the
purpose of definition was to state the features by which a
member of the class could be recognised. Popper admitted
the validity of this approach to definition, and designated
it methodological nominalism, to circumvent other
implications of nominalism in the realist-nominalist
controversy

We can accept Popper’s condemnation of essentialism,
but not his dismissal of concern with definitions.

Nominalist definitions are
implicit in physics and some other fields of science; but in
others, certainly in clinical medicine, it cannot be assumed
that there is general agreement about the factual
implications of some key words that are in common use.
For such words, explicit statements of these implications
are required.

Diseases are regarded as causes of illness. The
doctor’s skill consists in identifying the causal disease and
then prescribing the appropriate treatment

Nominalists recognise that diseases have no existence
apart from that of patients with them, and that the causal
implications of a diagnosis in current disease terminology
are widely varied

The names of diseases are a convenient
way of stating briefly the endpoint of a diagnostic process
that progresses from assessment of symptoms and signs
towards knowledge of causation

Thus, the
nominalist analysis of the disease concept places the
patient firmly in the centre of the picture, and makes the
practice of medicine necessarily holistic

There is a
recognisible group of patients with a pattern of symptoms
in which fatigue, muscle weakness, and aching are
prominent and for which no constant underlying cause or
specific abnormality of structure or function has been
identified. A brief term, conveying no unjustified
implication, by which to refer to the features characterising
this group is useful—to patients because it assures them
that their symptoms are being taken seriously, and to both
patients and doctors because delineation of a syndrome is
the first step towards elucidation of the chain of causation
and redefinition of the whole group or subgroups within it.

If symptoms follow an identified viral infection, the term
post-viral CFS is factually correct, but should not be taken
to imply more than a temporal relation.

Methodologically nominalist definitions avoid the
essentialist fallacy of regarding diseases as causes of illness,
and allow diagnostic conclusions to be indicated in the
disease terminology concisely and without unwarranted
implications.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q53618804)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q53618804)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q53618804&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(96)02049-1)  
