
GiniClust2: a cluster-aware, weighted ensemble clustering method for cell-type detection.
=========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q53748361]  

# Highlights

GiniClust2 successfully identifies both common and rare cell types in diverse datasets, outperforming existing methods. GiniClust2 is scalable to large datasets.

On the other hand, it remains a computational chal-
lenge to fully dissect the cellular heterogeneity within a large cell population. Despite the intensive effort in method development [3–8], significant limitations re- main.

A number of methods have been de- veloped to specifically detect rare cells [9–12], but the features used in these methods are distinct from those distinguishing major populations. Existing methods cannot satisfactorily detect both large and rare cell popula- tions.

Fig. 3 Analysis of the 68 k PBMC dataset [17]. a A visualization of reference labels for the full data set (left), along with the three cell subtypes selected for detailed analysis (right).


To reduce the effects of stochastic variation and technical artifacts, we started by considering only a subset of cell types whose transcriptomic profiles are distinct from one another. In particular, we focused on three large subpopulations: CD56+ natural killer (NK) cells, CD14+ monocytes, and CD19+ B cells

To test if GiniClust2 is useful for detecting previously unknown, biologically relevant cell types, we analyzed a published dataset associated with leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) withdrawal-induced mouse embryonic stem cell (mESC) differentiation

--> I guess all methods can identify "previously unknown" cell types, depending on what you call a cell type.

b A confusion map showing similarities between GiniClust2 clusters and reference labels. Values represent the proportion of cells per reference label that are in each cluster. c


By analyzing a number of simulated and real scRNA-seq datasets, we find that GiniClust2 con- sistently performs better than other methods in main- taining the overall balance of detecting both rare and common cell types

--> "rare and common cell types" is actually "clusters of scarce or abundant cells"
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q53748361)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q53748361)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q53748361/P921%3BP4510)  
