
Textpresso Central: a customizable platform for searching, text mining, viewing, and curating biomedical literature.
====================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q53838636]  
  
Publication date : 09 of March, 2018  

# Highlights
We describe the next generation of the Textpresso information retrieval system, Textpresso Central (TPC).TPC builds on the strengths of the original system by expanding the full text corpus to include the PubMed CentralOpen Access Subset (PMC OA), as well as the WormBaseC.elegansbibliography.

TPC also allows users to select textspans from the full text and annotate them, create customized curation forms for any data type, and send resultingannotations to external curation databases. As an example of such a curation form, we describe integration of TPCwith the Noctua curation tool developed by the Gene Ontology (GO) Consortium.

Textpresso Central is an online literature search and curation platform that enables biocurators andbiomedical researchers to search and mine the full text of literature by integrating keyword and category searcheswith viewing search results in the context of the full text. It also allows users to create customized curationinterfaces, use those interfaces to make annotations linked to supporting evidence statements, and then send thoseannotations to any database in the world.Textpresso Central URL:http://www.textpresso.org/tpc

Biocuration is the process of“extracting and organiz-ing”published biomedical research results

three essential tasks: 
1) identification of papers to curate (triage); 
2) classification of the relevant types of information contained in the paper (data type indexing); and 
3) fact extraction, including entity andrelationship recognition (database population) [7–10].


The TPC system is based on the UnstructuredInformation Management Architecture (UIMA) whichmakes  it  possible  to  employ  3rd-party  text  miningmodules that comply with this standard

 The fundamental data structurein UIMA is the Common Analysis Structure (CAS). It con-tains the original data (such as raw text) and a set of so-called“standoff annotations.”Standoff annotations are an-notations where the underlying original data are kept un-changed in the analysis, and the results of the analysis areappended as annotations to the CAS (with references totheir positions in the original data.

All annotations created manually through a paper viewerand curation interface are first stored in a Postgres data-base. A periodically run application will analyze the tableand append these annotations to the CAS file, so theycan be displayed in the paper viewer for further analysisby the curation community as well as TM and MachineLearning (ML) algorithms. Lucene indexes these annota-tions and makes them searchable. 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q53838636)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q53838636)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q53838636/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q53838636&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/S12859-018-2103-8)  
