
The Cellosaurus, a cell-line knowledge resource.
================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q54370168]  

# Highlights

The Cellosaurus is a knowledge resource on cell lines. It aims to describe all cell lines used in biomedical research. Its scope encompasses both vertebrates and invertebrates.

Among its many uses, the Cellosaurus is a key resource to help researchers identify potentially contaminated/misidentified cell lines, thus contributing to improving the quality of research in the life sciences.

All of these developments have helped to extend the usefulness of cell lines as reagents in laboratories, and we have recently estimated (unpublished results) that there is a total of;2 million publications that make use of cell lines.

Unfortunately, as scientists in academia generally operate with a limited budget, they will rarely buy certified stocks of cell lines. Instead, they obtain a cell line from the nearest colleague who is already using it, thus greatly increasing the risk that what they are using is not what they expect to be using. Furthermore, whereas the methodology to authen- ticate cell lines exists, scientists rarely do so, also for reasons of cost but also because they are often not aware of the severity of this problem.

10 names (C2, CF, DL, K8, ME, OS3, PC-1, PC-3, ST-1, and TK) are associated with 37 different cell lines! So far, we identified 350 cases of identical cell line names, but if one takes into account collisions between the name of1 cell line and the synonym of another, as well as names that only differ as a result of punctuation (for instance KMH-2 and KM-H2), then the number of nonunique cell-line names rises to slightly above 900.

--> Dang, that is worrying.

We thus started to develop, in 2012, what was meant at first to be a simple cell-line thesaurus, hence, the name “Cellosaurus.” As we became aware of the acute problem of cell-line misidentification and of the needs of the life sciences community for a comprehensive cell-line- curated resource, the Cellosaurus evolved to become a knowledge resource.

Many specialized cell-line databases have been established over the years that cater to a specific taxonomic range or a category of cell lines. Most of these resources are unfortunately no longer maintained and/or available.

--> This is a good point. Cellosaurus is a robust resource, but if smaller databases were integrated with Wikidata, then we would still have access to their valuable curation efforts.

Therefore, whereas all ofthe ontologies described hereinafter are useful in the context of the issue of the precise identification of cell lines, they only provide minimal information on these lines.

According to our analysis, there are ;50 organiza- tions that are major players in the distribution of cell lines (i.e., they each distribute .10 different cell lines).

These are resources that pull together various publicly available omics data sets so as to present an integrated view of the status of a specified subset of cell lines. We have identified the following 4 such resources, all developed around human cancer cell lines.

STR profiling is a powerful method to authenticate cell lines. Therefore, it is important to make available the reference STRprofiles for as many cell lines as possible. Until the Cellosaurus started incorporating this information, it was not easily found in any resource.

ChEMBL contains 1624 entries, of which ;1300 can be mapped to a precise cell line. The remaining terms are relevant to primary cells or groups ofcell lines (for example, “Panel NCI-60”) or are too ambiguous to be mapped to a known line.

SCOPE OF THE CELLOSAURUS

The Cellosaurus provides information on immortalized cell lines (e.g., transformed or cancer cell lines), naturally immortal cell lines (e.g., stem cell lines), as well as cell lines with a finite lifespan when these are distributed and used widely. It does not encompass primary cells. In terms of species, the Cellosaurus covers both
vertebrate and invertebrate (insects and ticks) cell lines. It does not include plant cell lines.

We chose to use the NCI Thesaurus over other disease ontologies, as it is comprehensive in terms of cancer terms for human, mouse, and rat

The problematic comment conveys a very important information item—that a cell line is known or suspected to be contaminated or misidentified.

--> These could be added to the Wikidata discussion page! 

it is an especially acute problem for curated, knowledge resources, such as the Cellosaurus, whose staff needs to peruse a high number ofscientific publications yet does not have the budget to pay the publishers’ article fees. This situation is especially frustrating when one realizes that knowledgebases are providing links back to publications and are, in effect, increasing the traffic toward publisher sites. Thus, in the context ofthe establishment ofthe Cellosaurus, it was necessary to use a variety ofnonstandard approaches to access the full-text version ofpapers behind paywalls

The current Cellosaurus release (release 25 ofMarch 2018) describes 101,528 cell lines from 590 species.

The OBO format version ofthe Cellosaurus is provided
for users who want to integrate core cell-line informa- tion (name, accession number, synonym, category, gender, hierarchy, etc.) within an ontological framework. It is not intended to contain all of the information available in the Cellosaurus (it does not contain STR profiles nor the age of the donor).

The Cellosaurus is updated;4–6 times/yr. Newreleases are announced on Twitter (@cellosaurus) and on ResearchGate (https://www.researchgate.net/project/Cellosaurus).

The Resource Identification Initiative62 (RRI) aims to “promote research resource identification, discovery, and reuse.” The initiative introduced the concept of Research Resource Identifiers (RRIDs), persistent and unique identifiers for referencing a research resource/

To ensure that they are recognizable, unique, and traceable, identifiers are prefixed with “RRID,” followed by a repository-specificprefix that indicates the source authority that provided it. For theCellosaurus, this isCVCL. In research papers, authors are thus encouraged to cite cell lines using sentences, such as “we have used HeLa (RRID:CVCL_0030) obtained from ATCC (catalog number CCL-2).”

THE CELLOSAURUS IN WIKIDATA
Wikidata (https://www.wikidata.org) is a free and collabo- ratively edited knowledge base hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation. The life-science community is interested63 in using this platform as a structured, semantic web-compatible integration hub for biologic and medical data. In this context, we initiated a project to enter a minimal set of information regardingall Cellosaurus cell lines inWikidata.Wehavedefined anumberof “properties” relevant to cell lines (https://www. wikidata.org/wiki/Q27968522), including 1 to link back to the Cellosaurus using its accession numbers (Cellosaurus ID: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Property:P3289). We have seeded Wikidata with a number of example cell lines (https://goo.gl/yyGFL3). The next step is to write a “bot” (https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:Bots) to enter and update cell-line information in Wikidata

In terms offormat and tools, we would like to provide a resource description frameworkversion oftheCellosaurus; this development would allow us to offer an advanced search tool based on the SPARQL technology

--> Partially achieved via Wikidata! - 1.3.3.1 Life sciences projects that use Wikidata



# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q54370168)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q54370168)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q54370168/P921%3BP4510)  
