
Querying neXtProt nanopublications and their value for insights on sequence variants and tissue expression
==========================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q54670808]  

# Highlights

One important challenge for data integration is that new biological sequences (proteins, DNA) have multiple issues related to interoperability potentially creating a quagmire in the published data, especially when different data sources do not appear to be in agreement. Thus, there is an urgent need for systems and methodologies to facilitate the integration of information.

neXtProt [10] is a web-based knowledge platform developed
within the Swiss Institute ofBioinformatics2 (SIB) centered around human proteins. neXtProt contains information describing many important aspects of human proteins: their function, their phys- ical features (domains, binding sites, PTMs, etc.), detection in proteomics experiments, interactions, subcellular localization and tissue expression, as well as their associations with diseases.

For the present work, we have converted data from neXtProt
into nanopublications to demonstrate how they can be used to seamlessly query the data and gain biological insight.

A secondary aim of this paper is to provide a discussion point between the bioinformatics and Semantic Web community. For the bioinformatics community, this paper shows how the nanopublication and semantic integration approach is critical for answering state-of-the art questions. For the Semantic Web community, this paper encourages continued investigation into managing biologically relevant annotations in a high-speed and usable way. In particular, we show how named graphs are central to answering questions in this domain.

Micropublications [8] aim to incentivize data contribution by recognizing the source of statements included in data resources. Micropublications preserve a brief narrative of the argumentation to enhance the transition of scientific publications to a machine consumable format and for eventual use on the Web for quick hu- man confirmation

Ovopubs [9] are an alternative model to encode scientific assertions along with their provenance. Two types of ovopub objects are proposed: assertion ovopubs and collection ovopubs, which contain one or more assertion or collection ovopubs. While the model benefits from having amore precise semantics, it implies that complex assertions are composed through constructing a modular network of assertions.

All nanopublications were modeled as 3 named graphs; an assertion graph, a graph for the provenance of the assertion, and a graph for provenance of the nanopublication (publicationInfo).

Ontologies on Bioportal [61] and the OBO foundry [62] were then consulted to find the appropriate predicates and the assertion graph was constructed.

Different resources may use synonyms to describe the same concept. Thus, a consistent tissue classification is needed to enable detection of tissue specificity. To address this issue, neXtProt has developed the CALIPHO Ontology for Human Anatomy (CALOHA), data version 1.12 [36]. CALOHA11 contains all terms provided by the expression resources, HPA [37] and BGee [38].

The assertion graph includes the protein, tissue, and the quality of the expression result (positive, negative), whereas the provenance graph includes the method of detection, the curation assessment, and the data used to make the assertion. In neXtProt, expression data are associated with qualitative quality of expression (weak, moderate, strong, etc.), as well as ‘not detected’ when a tissue or cell type had been tested and gave negative results.


With the aim to show a sample of the questions that can currently be asked of our nanopublication implementation, we are presenting example queries that answer three biologically interesting use cases: 4.1. List all proteins with their tissue expression, that have an SAP of either silver or gold quality resulting in an amino acid substitution producing a new amino acid target for potential phosphorylation;
4.2. List all proteins, and their corresponding tissue expression data, that have an SAP of either silver or gold quality that results in the loss ofa PTM of silver or gold quality (see Fig. 4);
4.3. List all tissues where the proteins have an SAP with the provenance of the COSMIC database of either silver or gold quality.

We present here an approach for nanopublication-based semantic integration of sequence variation and expression data that can be queried to evaluate potential functional consequences.

s. Even with the avail- ability of ontology repositories such as Bioportal [61] or the OBO foundry [62], we encountered many challenges in locating and eventually choosing the appropriate RDF properties and resources to model the data to correctly represent the notions expressed in the assertions. Often seemingly appropriate concepts were found although with subsequent extensive investigation of the domains, ranges, definitions, parents and children, they were rejected due to small disqualifying aspects of these details. However, solutions are appearing such as the community owned vocabulary system ConceptWiki [63], which allows the creation of concept-URL com- binations to be used and shared in the nanopublication modeling.

--> Wikidata is also a possibility.

We have demonstrated the feasibility of an approach for
querying formalized knowledge, modeled as nanopublications using several community-adopted ontologies, with the objective of integrating variation data and its associated knowledge in a uniform semantic environment

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q54670808)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q54670808)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q54670808/P921%3BP4510)  
