
Micropublication: incentivizing community curation and placing unpublished data into the public domain.
=======================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q54963746]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2018  

# Highlights

Further, many publicly funded experimental observations remain invisible to curation simply because they are never published: results often do not fit within the scope of a standard publication; trainee-generated data are forgotten when the experimenter (e.g. student, post-doc) leaves the lab; results are omitted from science narratives due to publication bias where certain results are considered irrelevant for the publication.

While authors are in the best position to curate their own data, they face a steep learning curve to ensure that appropriate referential tags, metadata, and ontologies are applied correctly to their observations, a task sometimes considered beyond the scope of their research and other numerous responsibilities.

We have created a novel scholarly communication platform that captures data from researchers and directly delivers them to information resources via Micropublication. This platform incentivizes authors to publish their unpublished observations along with associated metadata by providing a deliberately fast and lightweight but still peer-reviewed process that results in a citable publication. 

To capture these ‘orphan’ or hidden data and make it easy for researchers to share early research findings through databases, we have launched a platform—Micropublication, with the first public facet, Micropublication: biology—designed to allow researchers to directly submit their data while publishing them as micropublications, according to findable, accessible, interoperable and reproducible (FAIR) data principles (2).

The micropublication has been more loosely defined, to contain the same semantic component with assertion as nanopublications (3), but with some leeway to contain more explanatory free text. Interest in adopting micropublications into the biomedical field has proven difficult. PLOS Currents (http://currents.plos.org/) from the publishers of PLOS journals, aimed at the rapid dissemination of research through the publication of shorter than normal articles. However, even though the articles were short, they did not adhere to any semantic constructions.


In our model, individual findings of high scientific standard are disseminated to the community through their integration with prior knowledge by semi-automated incorporation into authoritative databases as metadata, where it can be mined through the existing interface. 

Although the value of curation is immeasurable, it can be a time-consuming process and one which does not scale to the scope of modern research.
Micropublication is a compelling way to solve these problems in a rapid and convenient way, a platform that does not place an overly undue obstacle in the most important work of a scientist: doing experiments.

--> Well, is that really the most important work?

Over the past decade NIH has moved to mandate researchers submit all their data to data repositories. 

More importantly, Micropublication has an indirect result that benefits the broader scientific community; submitting micropublications trains researchers in the value and process of deliberate, curatorial annotation and has the effect of researchers becoming more familiar with standard approaches in data sciences

We allow authors to flag the submission as (i) New findings, (ii) Replication: successful, (iii) Replication: unsuccessful, (iv) Negative results and (v) Methods and Reagents.

 As the data submission process is coupled to a publication pipeline, we are collaborating with the Collaborative Knowledge Foundation (Coko; https://coko.foundation) that offers a flexible publication management environment.

 Our submission guidelines comply with the Minimum Information Standards for scientific data reporting and current standards (Minimum Information for Biological and Biomedical Investigations-Biosharing portal, biosharing.org/standards) (14, 15). For example, for gene expression results, the guidelines are modeled after the MISFISHIE specifications [Minimum information Specification For In Situ Hybridization and immunohistochemistry Experiments, (18)], 

 Finally, accepted articles are processed through a text hyperlinking step (19) to identify, extract and link relevant or potential biological entities, which are used to automatically validate known entities and alert database curators to possible new entities that need to be entered into the database.

 All the experimental results submitted through Micropublication are not only readily available on Micropublication: biology but are also integrated into WormBase and discoverable alongside other curated data.

 The other challenge we need to overcome is training researchers in curation. By leveraging our collective experience curating the scientific literature, we hope to streamline this process. For example, in our experience, we have often seen an inability or hesitancy for authors to submit data despite their obvious expertise and deep knowledge of their own results. This may be because they lack the computational expertise to format the data, or an unfamiliarity with the underlying data models used at repositories, or the dependencies and relationships between data types. Clearly, due to its complexity, direct submission must be a brokered process.

 We proved that a submission can be processed in <2 business days, but we were challenged, as are other publishers, by reviewer’s responsiveness.

  Finally, we are leveraging our own professional curatorial expertise to build a user-friendly experience that mitigates barriers to participation.

  
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q54963746)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q54963746)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q54963746/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q54963746&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/DATABASE/BAY013)  
