
ezTag: tagging biomedical concepts via interactive learning.
============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q55483834]  

# Highlights
    
ezTag, a web-based annotation tool that allows curators to perform annotation and provide training data with humans in the loop.

ezTag utilizes multiple resources to provide bio-entity annotation in biomedical text

3 modules: 
- string match-based tagger,
- machine learning-based tagger and
- pre-trained taggers

Ruby on Rails and MySQL as a backend database. RESTful APIs were implemented in C++ and Perl. All

ezTag is a versatile annotation tool that enables users to perform both simple annotation and complex interactive learning for adaptive concept tagging.

ezTag is free and open to all users and there is no login requirement. ezTag can be accessed at http://eztag.bioqrator.org. The source code of the ezTag web interface is also avail- able at https://github.com/ncbi-nlp/ezTag.


or example, the most common user requests for PubTator (11), a widely used annotation tool for biomedical concepts we introduced in 2013, have been to support PubMed Central (PMC) full-text articles and to provide more flexibility for text-mined annotation. The latter is essential for some users because annotation guidelines may differ even for common bio-entity types.

The pre-trained TaggerOne (20) is used for annotating chemical and disease names. GNormPlus (21) is used for annotating gene/protein and organism/species. tmVar (22) is for sequence variations.

For a customized tagger, users can input text and get annotations programmatically via API. A help page of how to use the API is shown in each customized model web page. One can share a customized tagger with anyone using a RESTful API. RESTful APIs for pre-trained taggers are also available and the instructions can be found at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/research/bionlp/APIs

