
Academic Search Engine Optimization (ASEO)
==========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q56506009]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2010  

# Highlights

Based on three recently conducted studies, guidelines are
provided on how to optimize scholarly literature for academic search engines in
general, and for Google Scholar in particular

Finally, guidelines are provided on how authors can optimize their articles for academic search
engines.


SEO involves creating or modifying a Web site in a way
that makes it ‘easier for search engines to both crawl and index [its] content.

we define academic search engine optimization (ASEO) as follows:

Academic search engine optimization (ASEO) is the creation, publication, and modification of scholarly literature in a way that makes it easier for academic search engines to both crawl it and index it.

Researchers therefore need to think seriously about how to get their articles indexed by academic search engines.


The relevance of a document is basically a function of how often the
search term occurs in that document and in which part of the document it occurs.

It is also important to note that text in figures and tables usually is
indexed only if it is embedded as real text or within a vector graphic.
If text is embedded as a raster graphic (e.g., *.bmp, *.png, *.gif, *.tif,*.jpg), most, if not all, search engines will not index the text.

google scholar’s ranking algorithm
Google Scholar is one of those search engines that combine several factors into one ranking algorithm. The most important factors are relevance, citation count, author name(s), and name of publication.16

Google Scholar focuses strongly on document titles. Documents containing the search term in the title are likely to be positioned near the top
of the results list. Google Scholar also seems to consider the length of a
title: In a search for the term ‘SEO,’ a document titled ‘SEO: An Overview’ would be ranked higher than one titled ‘Search Engine Optimization (SEO): A Literature Survey of the Current State of the Art.’


Bert van Heerde, a professional in the field of SEO, uses the term
‘invitation based search engine’ to describe Google Scholar: Only articles
from trusted sources and articles that are ‘invited’


B. Writing Your Article
Once the keywords are chosen, they need to be mentioned in the
right places: in the title, and as often as possible in the abstract and the
body of the text (but, of course, not so often as to annoy readers).

ASEO should not be seen as a guide on how to cheat academic search
engines. Rather, it is about helping academic search engines to understand the content of research papers and, thus, about how to make this
content more widely and easily available.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q56506009)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q56506009)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q56506009/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Academic%20Search%20Engine%20Optimization%20%28ASEO%29'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
