
Exploring the Uncharacterized Human Proteome Using neXtProt
===========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q56815361]  
  
Publication date : 07 of September, 2018  

# Highlights

A  systematic  exploration  of  the available literature on uncharacterized human genes/proteins led to propose functional annotations for 113 proteins and to consolidate a list of 1,862 uncharacterized human proteins.

. Finally, a deep data mining in various publicly  available  resources  allowed  to  build  functional  hypotheses for  26  uncharacterized human proteins validated at protein level (uPE1).


Characterizing a protein in human tissues is often difficult due to sample access restrictions and most functional  studies  are  performed  on  cell  lines,  which  only  partially  reproduce in  vivo  conditions. Although  new  technologies  of  targeted  genome  editing  accelerate  initial  steps  in  protein characterization,  understanding  the  function(s)  of  each  protein  in  its  biological  context  requires discrete,  often  time-consuming  studies.


The  Human  Protein  Atlas (HPA)2 and neXtProt3, which focus on human proteins, provide important support at every step of characterization  projects.  neXtProt  collects  high-quality  data  at  genomic,  transcriptomic  and proteomic  levels  for  every  human  protein,  and  converts  it  into  semantic  annotations.  This  format allows  querying  not  only  neXtProt  data  but  also  any  data  from  compatible  resources  through  an advanced query tool based on the SPARQL language. 

--> Nice!

According to neXtProt medical annotations, originating from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and Orphanet17, 29 protein-coding genes with unknown functionare related to diseases (Table S3, column J). Given their potential medical relevance, finding the function of these proteins should be a high priority. Twelve  have  mutations  located  in  their  sequences  that  directly  cause  diseases  (including  single amino-acid variants, intron splicing donor sites, intron insertions and GAC expansions). Five of them (ATXN8, BEAN1, CWF19L1, TMEM240, and VWA3B) are involved in spinocerebellar ataxias. 


This proportion (26%) is much higher than for all PE1-4 entries in neXtProt (9%). Lack of conservation  in  mouse  may  be  one  of  the  reasons  why  some  proteins  still  lack  functional characterization. However, according to MouseMine knock-out mice have been established for 144 of the 1,353 genes with mapping to MGI (T able S3, column L). Combining the observed phenotypes with information from neXtProt can help to build or refine functional hypotheses, as will be discussed in the next sections. 

Two other proteins, ANKRD37 and NIPSNAP3A, are not only annotated both at cytosol and nucleus, but also at mitochondria.  


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q56815361)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q56815361)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q56815361/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q56815361&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1021/ACS.JPROTEOME.8B00537)  
