
The future of annotation/biocuration
====================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q56880438]  

# Highlights

This is not a talk!
• But rather a series of truisms (obvious facts);
• Most of which have already been said by
Janet yesterday evening and a few minutes
ago by Phil;
• But maybe some are worth repeating!


The main guiding criteria is that all of those activities are
meant to help the Life Sciences community to make
sense of all the data that is accumulating. 


As long as we are seen as catalogers, the
value of what we provide is not going to be
judged by its intrinsic value.


Increasingly, this data will not have been generated to answer a
specific biological research question but as collateral (damage?)
to routine diagnostic, quality-control and environmental-monitoring
procedure; Consequently no budget will have been allocated to curate this
data.

You can not propagate something that
does not exist;
• Therefore corpora of high-quality manuallyannotated data are an essential requirement of
the worldwide biocuration efforts

--> This is central. 

biocuration can not be done in a vacuum it
requires:
– The development of software platforms to allow the process
to be efficient and standardized;
– The development of interfaces (mostly web-based) for
users to make us of the annotation;
– The development of controled-vocabularies and ontologies; 
– IT and administrative support


Community annotation
• Up to now, it has not been a big success!
--> There is potential, we just need to make it easy and profitable.

There are a probably more than 2’ 000 resources available:
how can we expect them to know what they should submit to
whom?

It is quite depressive to think that we are spending millions in
grants for people to perform experiments, produce new
knowledge, hide this knowledge in a often badly written text and
then spend some more millions trying to second guess what the
authors really did and found.

Lets be honest…
• Biocurators are often more critical and have a broader
view than the average lab scientist;
• We often spend more time “ de-annotating” what
people have reported then entering their data;
• We all know that, but we are shy of making this known
outside of our field!


# Comments
Reference to the Wikipedia article!