
Structural Remodeling of the Human Colonic Mesenchyme in Inflammatory Bowel Disease
===================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57025321]  
  
Publication date : 27 of September, 2018  

# Highlights

Single-cell profiling of human colonic
mesenchymal cells identifies a colitisassociated population that expresses
factors contributing to epithelial cell
dysfunction and inflammation.

Mesenchymal cells of the intestinal lamina propria are a heterogeneous population of non-hematopoietic, non-epithelial cell
types that play instrumental roles in innate immunity,


We then cataloged 4,378 human colonic mesenchymal cells
from healthy individuals using droplet based 10x Genomics
scRNA-seq to obtain a higher-resolution map. 

. We identified the remaining clusters as counterparts
to fibroblast-like cell types revealed by our initial survey (Figures
S1G, 1B, and 1C). Myofibroblasts were defined by gene ontology
(GO) terms ‘‘muscle system process’’ and ‘‘muscle contraction’’
(Figure S2A), as well as expression of contractile genes, a-SMA
(ACTA2) and transcription factors not previously linked to myofibroblasts, which may enable future explorations of ontogeny of
these cells (Figure 1Dv).

--> Hmm, "defined by GO terms"; probably not ontological definition in mind, but nevertheless interesteing

Overall, our data identified new and distinct colonic mesenchymal subsets with specific functional properties that exhibited
unique marker gene expression and anatomical location within
the lamina propria.

Dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) colitis is a commonly used colitis
model that leads to a pro-inflammatory phenotype with parallels
to human IBD.

In colitis, we observed the emergence of S4, which uniquely
gained lymph node FRC-like features (Figure 4H). We found
S4-expressed Lox and Loxl1 blockade attenuated DSS colitis
and reduced circulating markers of oxidative stress (Figures 7F
and 7G). IL-6 and TNFSF14 restricted colonic epithelial cell
proliferation and induced expression of stemness genes, such
as Lgr5 (Figures 7B–7E). This may reflect recruitment of normally
quiescent epithelial ‘‘label-retaining cells’’ (LRCs), that are recalled to the stem cell compartment following inflammation
mediated injury (Buczacki et al., 2013). O

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q57025321)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q57025321)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q57025321&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2018.08.067)  
