
Applying Ontology Design Patterns in Bio-ontologies
===================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57002925]  

# Highlights

Biological knowledge has been, to date, coded by biologists in axiomatically lean bio-ontologies. To facilitate axiomatic enrichment, complex semantics can be encapsulated as Ontology Design Patterns (ODPs). 

Biology is an interesting test-bed for knowledge management, due to the volatility, breadth and complexity of the knowledge that needs to be represented in bio- ontologies.

biologists often lack training with Knowledge Repre- sentation (KR) languages with strict semantics and, therefore, do not use many of the features of those languages.

Providing predefined ODPs can help biologists overcome the difficulty of using
a logic-based language, that most biologists (and other end-users) often find difficult and counter-intuitive.

To ease the application of ODPs, as well as the general application ofaxioms during enrichment, we present the OntologyPrePro- cessor Language (OPPL) [3], a high-level macro language for adding axioms to an ontology,

The applicability of ODPs is, however, much wider and should be a significant com- ponent of the migration of axiomatically lean bio-ontologies to ones that are axiomatically rich. In this section we briefly present some ODPs to show their benefits in modelling biological knowledge.


The three ODPs presented tackle the same problem: how to represent “mod-
ifiers” and “values”. Modifiers and values are a subset of the constructs that re-
fine the status of independent entities using dependent entities, variously called “qualities”, “attributes”, “features”, etc. by different authors.

Certain cellular components have a position within a cell as part of the overall processes in which they participate. Thus, “position” is the modifier and the “cellular component” is the independent entity modified. The possible “values” for the “modifier” are “apical” and “basal”. This modifier applies only to “cell parts”, e.g. mitochondria; the “values” are mutually exclu- sive and only one may apply to any one “cell component”. This scenario is a real problem faced, for example, by the Gene Ontology (GO) [9], where we can find terms like basal labyrinth (GO:0033774) without any further axiomisation in terms of position (only is a and part of relationships)

The requirements are: 
(1) to represent which modifiers apply to which independent entities and vice versa;
(2) to represent which values apply to each modifier (possibly according to which independent entity it applies —e.g.,“position” does not apply to “cytoplasm”);
(3) the mutual constraints amongst the values— whether there can be only one or more than one values and whether the values are mutually exclusive (the usual case);
(4) whether the modifiers apply to all or only some of a given category of independent entity

A differ- ent ODP may be chosen in each implementation depending on the requirements of the user or the system; therefore there is no one “best” ODP.

2.1 Entity-Quality ODP

The entities are linked to the qualities by Qualified Cardinality Restrictions (QCRs) (max 1 if the quality is accidental or exactly 1 if the quality is intrinsic). This ODP, compared with the following two, offers simplicity in authoring as only one general object prop- erty is needed (has quality).

2.2 Entity-Property-Quality ODP Qualities can also be modelled using the Entity-Property-QualityODP (Figure 3), in which (optionally functional) object properties are used to represent different types of qualities

2.3 Entity-Feature-Value ODP
This is the most general ODP for representing modifiers (Figure 4). This ODP is the only one that allows for modifiers with multiple aspects (e.g. a position with an orientation and a state), which is its main advantage over the other two ODPs.

The use of ODPs in biology can be regarded as a microcosm of the challenges
that knowledge management will have to face as it becomes more widespread, especially through the Semantic Web. Although ODPs’ usage in bio-ontologies is still limited, they have already brought benefits in terms of axiomatic richness and maintainability [13,5]. We therefore envisage that they will be of similar benefit for the wider Semantic Web.

# Comments 

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q57002925)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q57002925)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q57002925/P921%3BP4510)  
