
The anatomy of a nanopublication
================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57011346]  

# Highlights

the Concept Web Alliance has promoted the notion of nanopublications (core scientific statements with associated context). In this document, we present a model of nanopublications along with a Named Graph/RDF serialization of the model

The challenge now becomes: what needs to be done to put the context that was formerly provided by
a document back in to a statement. In this paper we explore the extra components that would need to be available to reinforce the value of a statement to the point where it could in itself be considered a publication. Due to its small size relative to a full paper, this is termed a ‘nanopublication’

Concept – a concept is the smallest, unambiguous unit of thought. A concept is uniquely identifi- able.

Nanopublication – a set of annotations that refer to the same statement and contains a minimum set of (community) agreed-upon annotations.
• S-Evidence – all the nanopublications that refer the same statement.

Named Graphs [1] is a simple extension to RDF adding the ability to assign a URI to a given RDF graph. While Named Graphs are not yet a W3C standard they are widely supported by many implementations of the Semantic Web infrastructure. 

There has already been much work done on representing scientific discourse on the Web [3]. We propose to adopt wholesale wherever possible artifacts from that work. In particular, we believe that the SWAN series of ontologies [2] and its mapping to the SIOC [6] provide a comprehensive starting point

@prefix cw: <http://conceptwiki.org/index.php/Concept> .

:G1 = { cw:malaria cw:isTransmittedBy cw:mosquitoes}

By referring to concepts on the Concept Wiki, publishers of nanopublications can facilitate their aggregation.

the Concept Wiki provides a place for users to easily create nanopublications. Finally,the Concept Wiki will follow the principles of Linked Data.

--> Concept Wiki is offline. 

# Comments
