
RNA velocity of single cells
============================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57173237]  
  
Publication date : 01 of August, 2018  

# Highlights

 Here we show that RNA velocity—the time derivative of the gene expression state—can be directly estimated by distinguishing between unspliced and spliced mRNAs in common single-cell RNA sequencing protocols. RNA velocity is a high-dimensional vector that predicts the future state of individual cells on a timescale of hours.

 During a dynamic process, an increase in the transcription rate α results in a rapid increase
of unspliced mRNA, followed by a subsequent increase of spliced mRNA (Fig. 1c and
Supplementary Note 2 Section 1) until a new steady state is reached. Conversely, a drop in
the rate of transcription first leads to a rapid drop in unspliced mRNA, followed by reduction
of spliced mRNAs. During induction of gene expression, unspliced mRNAs are present in
excess of the expectation based on the equilibrium rate γ, whereas the opposite is true
during repression (Fig. 1d). 

Some cycling progenitor cells (Extended Data Figs. 9b) expressed neurogenic transcription
factors (e.g. Neurod2, Neurod4, Eomes) and those cells showed velocity pointing toward the
immature neuroblast state, leading towards the three main neuronal branches in the upper
part of the manifold.


We validated the expression of known and novel markers of
cortical neuron development by multiplexed in situ hybridization (Fig. 4b-c), confirming the
predicted expression of CLU and FBXO32 in the ventricular zone (radial glia; marked by
SOX2), UNC5D in the intermediate zone (neuroblasts; marked by EOMES) and SEZ6 and
RBFOX1 in the cortical plate (neurons; marked by SLC17A7, also known as VGLUT1). 

e. Abundance of spliced (s) and unspliced (u) mRNAs for circadian-associated genes in a
24h time course of mouse liver12. The unspliced mRNAs are predictive of spliced mRNA at
the next time point

--> This figure is awesome 

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q57173237)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q57173237)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q57173237&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-018-0414-6)  
