
A single-cell atlas of the airway epithelium reveals the CFTR-rich pulmonary ionocyte
=====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57318689]  
  
Publication date : 01 of August, 2018  

# Highlights

Finally, we identified a
novel, rare cell type that we call the ‘pulmonary ionocyte’, which
co-expresses FOXI1, multiple subunits of the vacuolar-type
H+-ATPase (V-ATPase) and CFTR, the gene that is mutated in cystic
fibrosis

We performed single-cell RNA sequencing analysis8
 (scRNA-seq) on
7,662 mouse tracheal epithelial cells and 2,970 primary human bronchial epithelial cells (HBECs) differentiated at an air–liquid interface
(ALI)

Fig. 2 | Single-cell RNA-seq reveals recovery-specific cell states.

 in the human data we identified a
novel cluster that was enriched for SLC16A7 (Fig. 1d, Supplementary
Table 2), which encodes the monocarboxylate transporter 2 (MCT2)
that is involved in acidification of cystic fibrosis HBEC cultures17, as
well as AIRE, the gene that drives negative selection of self-reactive
T cells in thymic epithelium18. This cluster contained the largest number
of highly specific genes in the dataset, with a greater percentage of
mitochondrial genes. This cluster may reflect cellular stress19 or may
represent a unique antigen-presenting airway epithelial cell

--> Cell type, not cell, clearly.

This cluster expressed subunits of the V-ATPase proton pump, which are also
expressed in Foxi1-expressing ionocytes in the mucociliary epithelium
of Xenopus larval skin, intercalated cells of the mammalian kidney
and in forkhead-related (FORE) cells of the inner ear20,21.

We named these cells pulmonary ionocytes.

Fig. 3 | FOXI1 specifies a novel cell type, the CFTR-rich ‘pulmonary
ionocyte’. a,

--> Cool, some indications of a richer ontology too. Some Xenopus cell types to Wikidata seem a good option.

Xenopus epidermis, ionocytes differentiate from an inner layer of
basal cells, and their specification is regulated by Notch signalling21,23,
a pathway that is important in airway basal cell fate25–27. The specification of pulmonary ionocytes shows clear similarities

his cell type shows co-enrichment of the proton-secreting
V-ATPase and the anion-secreting CFTR channel, suggesting a role in
luminal pH regulation that could be relevant for the pathology of cystic
fibrosis

# Comments

## Tags
1.4.2. A focus on single-cell RNA sequencing
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q57318689)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q57318689)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q57318689/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q57318689&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q57318689/P921%3BP4510)  
