
Literature-based discovery: Beyond the ABCs
===========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57372419]  
  
Publication date : 26 of July, 2011  

# Highlights
A few years ago, Vetle Torvik and I published a case of “undiscovered public
knowledge” in genomics databases – namely, the fact that a significant subset of
mammalian microRNA precursors derive entirely from genomic repeat elements
(Smalheiser and Torvik, 2005). To make this observation, all that was necessary was to
view microRNA genes on the UCSC Genome Browser, juxtapose the microRNA track
with the Repeatmasker track, and notice the association. The knowledge contained in the
Browser is entirely public and explicit; nothing implicit was involved. However, no one
had apparently thought to look for such a pattern before -- it was literally hidden in plain
view.

A further ambiguity is that literature-based discovery can refer either to a “system” –
that is, a software product designed to assist (or replace) humans in formulating
hypotheses – or to a “strategy” – a cognitive approach that humans employ to combine
assertions, whether carried out as a deliberate conscious effort or in an intuitive manner.
For several reasons, it has been very difficult to obtain hard evidence documenting the
extent to which literature-based discovery does, or potentially can, accelerate the process
of scientific discovery
However, I argue that most implicit information present in the scientific literature does
not follow such simple templates (and may not consist of simple factual or propositional
statements at all). Rather, it is analogies and images -- juxtapositions and novel
associations of ideas – that appear most often to stimulate scientists to formulate radically
new hypotheses (see discussion in Simonton, 2004). Many classic discoveries follow AB
and BC assertions but at a rather high level of abstraction that is unlikely to be captured
or highlighted in explicit templated factual statements


Another limitation of the NLP-based approach, i.e., utilizing templated assertions, is
that they often enforce semantic agreement across the linking term. That is, to link AB
and BC assertions, the term B must have the same meaning or context in both AB and
BC. Yet Magnesium itself can be mapped to many different concepts – it can be
conceptualized as an element, a cation, a dietary ingredient, a bodily fluid constituent, a
co-factor of enzymes, a channel blocker, or a therapeutic agent. The same term (Mg) is
often discussed in different contexts in different literatures that we would like to connect.
The limited “slippage” across those loose links is desirable, and may be lost if links are
forced to share the same semantic meaning or connotation. Root-Bernstein (1989) gave
an example of the importance of slippage in the discovery of lysozyme by Alexander
Fleming: “Enter Fleming the mischievous game player. His problem: What causes his
frequent and uncomfortable runny noses? Wait a minute! Runny bottoms are caused by
bacteriophage infections! Why not runny noses? A hypothesis is born of verbal analogy!”


How could this happen? I said the issue was very simple: Mg is known to gate (i.e., limit) calcium
currents through the NMDA receptor. Over-stimulation of the NMDA receptor, or over-
accumulation of intracellular calcium, causes excitotoxicity, which occurs in many
diverse situations (stroke, ALS, seizures, etc.). Thus, a deficiency of Mg should
exacerbate excitotoxicity and Mg supplementation should help to counteract it, not just in
migraine, but across many neurological diseases.


This is reminiscent of a t-shirt slogan that I
have seen: “No matter what the question is… the answer is to do more yoga.”

The biggest need, and the biggest “bang for the buck” for literature-based
discovery, is to identify research areas that are currently neglected, but which, when
juxtaposed with other information, have the potential to identify important frontier areas
for investigation

The A-B-C model is not “wrong”. However, it is only one of several different types of
models that can contribute to the development of the next generation of LBD tools.


# Comments

Really good article. 


## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q57372419)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q57372419)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q57372419&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ASI.21599)  
