
Improving Text Mining with Controlled Natural Language: A Case Study for Protein Interactions
=============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57402195]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2006  

# Highlights

 If authors and editors summarize the main facts in a controlled natural language,text mining will become easier and more powerful
his section explains our motivation, introduces the language Attempto Con-trolled English (ACE) and compares it  with other  knowledge representationlanguage


Since we want to access scientific results by computers, we have to formalizethis knowledge at some point. Today researchers write their results in naturallanguage. To extract these results and to formalize them, manual or computer-supported text mining is necessary. Thus the formalization is accomplished bycomputer-programs or by humans, and in either case it is done without the helpof the corresponding researchers. The article is the only source of information.Since such articles are highly domain-specific, they require a lot of backgroundknowledge. Therefore the formalization is a very demanding task, even for hu-mans. Altogether this causes a lot of knowledge to be lost in the vast amount ofbiomedical literature.

he representations in first-order logic and DL are moreconcise, but they are still not understandable for people who are not familiarwith formal notations. The graphical notation of UML looks nice, but for anon-specialist it is hard to guess the meaning of all the shapes and arrows. TheACE representation, in contrast, should be immediately understandable for anyEnglish speaking person. It looks perfectly like natural English and thus thereader might not even recognize that it is a formal language.

We can state that controlled natural languages like ACE minimize the gapbetween machines and humans. 

headaptorAP2is  aheterotetramericcomplex thatassociateswith clathrin  and  regulatoryproteinstomediaterapidendocytosisfromtheplasma membrane. Here, wereporttheidentificationof ...Keywords:Protein interactions;  Two-hybrid;  Vesicular traffic;  Adaptorprotein; Protein kinase; Mitotic checkpoint.ACE Summary:Beta2-Adaptin binds BubR1 in Yeast-Two-Hybrid. Atrunk-domain of Beta2-Adaptin interacts-with BubR1. Bub1 interacts-with thetrunk-domain of Beta2-Adaptin. Bub1 interacts-with every beta-sheet of APand BubR1 interacts-with every beta-sheet of AP

Due to the immense benefits such a system would bring along, we believein the great potential of our approach. It could be a first step towards bettercommunication and persistence of biomedical knowledge


# Comments

## Tags


1.1.3. Interoperable publication processes: nanopublications
1.2. Formal representation of knowledge



# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q57402195)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q57402195)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q57402195/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q57402195&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
