
Ontology Design Patterns for Semantic Web Content
=================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57774232]  

# Highlights

The paper presents a framework for introducing design patterns that facilitate or improve the techniques used during ontology lifecycle

a simple participation pattern (including objects taking part in events) emerges in (different) domain ontologies

In some situations, experts do not grasp the utility of ontologies until they realize that an ontology can encode effectively a domain conceptual pattern. Once experts realize it, they usually start discussions on how to improve their own rational procedures by means of ontology engineering techniques!

In the seventies, the architect and mathematician Christopher Alexander introduced the term “design pattern” for shared guidelines that help solve design problems.

Taking seriously the architectural metaphor, the notion has been eagerly endorsed by software engineering.

In this paper, a step towards the encoding of conceptual, rather than logical design patterns, is made. In other words, while OEP is proposing patterns for solving design problems for OWL, independently of a particular conceptualization, this paper proposes patterns for solving (in OWL or another logical language) design problems for the domain classes and properties that populate an ontology, therefore addressing content problems.

the notion of a “Generic Use Case” (GUC), i.e. a generalization of use cases that can be provided as examples for an issue of domain modelling.

a methodological observation: ontologies must be built out of domain tasks that can be captured by means of competency questions [11]. A competency question is a typical query that an expert might want to submit to a knowledge base of its target domain, for a certain task. In principle, an accurate domain ontology should specify all and only the conceptualizations required in order to answer all the competency questions formulated by, or acquired from, experts.

A formal pattern that encodes a GUC is called here a Conceptual (or Content) Ontology Design Pattern (CODeP)

The advantages of CODePs for ontology lifecycle over the Semantic Web are straightforward: firstly, patterns make ontology design easier for both knowledge engineers and domain experts (imagine having a menu of pre-built, formally consistent components, pro-actively suggested to the modeller); secondly, patterned design makes it easier ontology integration - perhaps the most difficult problem in ontology engineering.

# Comments

It was a bit too hard given my current knowledge about semantic technologies. 

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q57774232)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q57774232)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q57774232/P921%3BP4510)  
