
Knowledge.Bio: A Web application for exploring, building and sharing webs of biomedical relationships mined from PubMed
=======================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57831016]  

# Highlights

In the first release of this platform, conceptual relations are drawn from the Semantic Medline Database and the Implicitome, two complementary resources derived from text mining of PubMed abstracts.

Availability— Knowledge.Bio is hosted at
http://knowledge.bio/ and the open source code is available at http://bitbucket.org/sulab/kb1/.

--> site is down :(

Knowledge.Bio integrates explicit, semantic relations (e.g.
stimulates, causes) with statistically predicted, untyped associations between genes and diseases. Currently, the semantic relations are retrieved from the Semantic Medline Database (SemMedDB) [2], a collection of more than 70 million relations mined from PubMed abstracts using

The knowledge in the system is centered on the relationships between uniquely defined concepts, which may either be biomedical concepts from the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) [6] or genes cataloged within Entrez Gene [7].

Knowledge.Bio is a “one-stop-shop”, a single page application allowing the user to explore biomedical knowledge.

For example, some may disagree with the relation in Figure 3 indicating ‘Anesthetics treat Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome’ and thus can choose to remove it from their personal maps. In

Since Swanson’s introduction of the paradigm of ‘literature
based discovery’ (LBD) [8], a variety of LBD tools have been introduced. Many of the these are reviewed in [11, 12] though most of the approaches mentioned are either not represented in user friendly applications or are no longer publicly available. A few examples of tools that are online at the time of this writing include Semantic MEDLINE [13], EpiphaNet [14], and Arrowsmith [15].

Knowledge.Bio provides a novel Web interface for user
discovery and interpretation of research literature, indexed in personal concept maps. The application is responsive, stable, requires no authentication, and provides empowers its users with otherwise hard-to-access text-mined information in a simple, user-friendly manner. Further, the application is completely open source and could easily be extended or adapted by motivated developers.
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q57831016)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q57831016)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q57831016/P921%3BP4510)  
