
In defence of classification
============================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57945379]  
  
Publication date : 01 of June, 2001  

# Highlights

It has increasingly been recognised that units of biological classification cannot be
identified with the units of evolution. After briefly defending the necessity of this
distinction I argue, contrary to the prevailing orthodoxy, that species should be treated
as the fundamental units of classification and not, therefore, as units of evolution.
This perspective fits well with the increasing tendency to reject the search for a monistic basis of classification and embrace a pluralistic and pragmatic account of the
species category. It also provides a diagnosis of the paradoxical but popular idea that
species are individuals: Species are not individuals, but the units of evolution are.


It is of course possible that the units of evolution could also serve as units of
classification, and that this is in fact the case seems to be very widely assumed by writers on the topic. But, and this is the first thesis I shall defend in this paper, units of evolution are far too diverse a set of entities to provide a useable partition of organisms into classificatory units.

--> So true, dude

To this day almost everyone who is not professionally involved in theoretical systematics assumes that the species category is a classificatory concept. So I conclude that species should be treated as units of classification not units of evolution.


Classification in biology has a life of its own. Biologists in areas only tangentially connected to evolutionary
theory, such as ecologists, ethnobotanists, or ethologists, need to classify organisms, as do foresters, conservationists, gamekeepers, and herbalists.


As a matter of fact I take it that this is often the
case: the members of a species do often constitute a unit of evolution.2 But putting
matters this way should also make it clear that once we distinguish these two kinds
of units, and recognise that they belong to quite distinct ontological categories, it
would be strange to insist that such coincidence must always occur


What are units of evolution? What kind of entities, that is to say, evolve? Individual organisms develop, but are not said to evolve. Evolution occurs when the
properties characteristic of the individuals in a phylogenetic lineage change over
time, so we can say that the units of evolution are lineages of some kind.


As was recognised from its early days, it provides no account of the taxonomy of asexual organisms, and hence of all organisms for the greater part of
the history of terrestrial life. Since asexual organisms certainly evolve and certainly require classification, this is a far more serious obstacle to the project of unifying evolutionary theory and taxonomy than has often been acknowledged.


Two general problems emerge. First, if we attempt to apply a rigid criterion
such as reproductive isolation we will end up with species which range in size
from enormous groups of (currently recognised) species such as the brambles or
the oaks, to groups consisting of a handful of organisms. Second, we begin to see
that the very idea of a unit of evolution is much vaguer than might first have been supposed.

most species are more like slime molds and sponges than like highly organized and
tightly integrated multicellular organisms—at least in terms of their individuality. Not only can almost any part of a species give rise to a new lineage, but those new lineages also commonly reunite after separating. Consequently there will be many cases in which it will be difficult to determine the precise number and boundaries of species . . . (de Queiroz, 1999, p. 79).

 This leads us again to the question of what the intrinsic virtues of a taxonomic scheme should be. Some obvious ones can readily be identified:

(a) Comprehensiveness

The condition that something useful can be said
about any organism seems a minimal requirement for an acceptable taxonomy.7

2.4.4.1. 3+1 rules for defining one type

(b) Suitably sized base-level groups
One of the main defects with reproductively or phylogenetically determined
groups is that these tend to generate groups differing in size by many orders of
magnitude. 

The criterion of suitable size is necessarily a vague one. Bitterns are rarer than blackbirds, but this should not motivate the attempt to divide blackbirds up into lots of geographic races about as numerous as are bitterns. Despite this vagueness, however, it is clear enough that some such desideratum is violated by the suggestion that there is only one species of deciduous oak in America, or that common types of bacteria should be divided into innumerable species the vast majority of which go extinct long before anyone bothers to distinguish them.

(c) Reasonably homogeneous groups
and
(d) Reasonably sharp boundaries between groups


An ideal taxonomy would distinguish entities as members of wholly homogeneous classes, which are reliably distinguishable
from the equally homogeneous members of every other class. This ideal would
have been achieved by a taxonomy based on the essential property or properties
of members of the taxon, if only there had been such properties. 

One can, for example, distinguish
blackberries as belonging to a particular species by drawing geographic lines and
defining anything to the south of the line as belonging to one species, anything to
the north to another. Whether such a consequence as different parts of the same
bush belonging to different species would be a price worth paying for this advantage is another matter.

(e) Taxonomic conservatism
A quite different kind of desideratum for a taxonomic scheme is that it should
be as stable as possible

The advantages of
taxonomic stability are obvious and considerable, maximising the stability of
detailed biological knowledge whether stored in libraries or human brains. The fact
that a pragmatic and pluralistic conception of taxonomy is able to set a much higher
standard for taxonomic revision is a considerable advantage for such an approach

 the evolution of horses on Earth has no bearing on whatever horses there may be elsewhere in the universe. An obvious explanation is that horses are parts of the evolving unit rather than members of an evolving kind. And it is individuals, never kinds, that have parts.

 I do not deny, on the other hand, that the things that
evolve are historically specific individuals. If these are not species, what are they?
The most plausible answer, and ultimately the one I take to be correct, is that the units of evolution are lineages. Lineages in general are sequences of entities related by ancestry and descent.

Populations are themselves, I take it, individuals, and they are the temporal parts of other individuals, lineages.9

9 A useful discussion of the concept of a lineage is provided by de Queiroz (1999), though in the
context of an argument I reject, that species are segments of lineages.

Recognising that in some cases the group of organisms distinguished by a traditional classificatory term coincides with a biologically interesting evolutionary
individual strikes me as a very bad reason for coopting the term ‘species’ to refer
solely to such individuals. So I enlist Sterelny as a hostile witness in support of
my claim that we must give up the idea that being a species is an important biological property.

-> hahahaha that is great

In fact for the human sciences there is no general taxonomy.
The question what kind does that human belong to is meaningless without further
context. There are, perhaps, people who think there is a clear answer to such questions, namely racists.

taxonomies are developed precisely in relation to laws that are discovered, or at
least proposed, about members of kinds. Indeed, the possibility of formulating such
laws might well have been added to my earlier list of desiderata for a classification.
This brings up again the issue of whether there are laws about the members of
biological species

--> Analogy clear for cell types.

On the other hand, given that homogeneity is an important
desideratum of the taxa generated by a classification, we should certainly expect
there to be modest but fairly reliable generalisations about the members of species.

post-Darwinian biology
has increasingly revealed that in many parts of the biological world there really
are nothing like traditional species at all. Evolution has generated highly diverse
patterns of diversity, some of which involve divisions similar to, or even coextensive with, what have previously been considered species, but some of which do
not. Perhaps Darwin’s work should have been entitled The Nonexistence of Species,
except that no one would have had any reason to take such a work seriously

the earlier refusal of protozoologists to designate cryptic species by Latin binomials led some evolutionists to suppose that protozoologists do not understand evolutionary biology. Protozoologists, on the other hand, suspect that evolutionary geneticists do not always understand that taxonomy serves clients other than evolutionists. Different terms may be needed in different contexts (Nanney, 1999, p. 99)

--> 100%

# Comments
Nice text
## Tags
2.2.1. Lines of thought about the taxon concept
2.2.2. Bacteria, cell lines and the plurality of the concept of taxon
2.4 The concept of "cell type"

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q57945379)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q57945379)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q57945379/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'In%20defence%20of%20classification'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
