
Who Models the World?: Collaborative Ontology Creation and User Roles in Wikidata
=================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q58336167]  
  
Publication date : 01 of November, 2018  

# Highlights
In this paper, we study the relationship between
different Wikidata user roles and the quality of the Wikidata ontology. To do so we first propose a framework
to evaluate the ontology as it evolves. We then cluster editing activities to identify user roles in monthly
time frames. Finally, we explore how each role impacts the ontology


In the context of Wikidata, our contribution is threefold: (i.) we
propose a quality framework for the Wikidata ontology, demonstrating its suitability as a tool to
monitor changes to its quality; (ii.) we derive a set of user roles based on a broader range of activity
patterns and contribute to contextualise Wikidata within the field of online collaboration; (iii.) we
shed light on the links between collaborative processes and the outcomes of its community, by
investigating how user roles influence the ontology quality

Wikidata does not have a predefined formal ontology. The ontology is loosely defined by the
relationships between the Items in the graph, similarly to Freebase [6]. This means, among others,
that Wikidata does not formally distinguish between Items that are classes, for example city, and
Items that are entities, for example London

Seasoned users are more likely to have a central role in the community,
participating more often in discussions on community pages, and mentoring less experienced
peers. Furthermore, users with different levels of experience are likely to carry out different tasks.
More established editors focus more on quality control and on building and maintaining the
ontology. Some of them voice their concerns about common errors in the construction of taxonomic
hierarchies done by novices, echoing what was reported in [8]. T

The ontology graph was built on the
basis of the P31 (instance of ) and P279 (subclass of ) Properties


We collected a total of 783, 604 user/timeframes, corresponding to 190, 765 unique human registered
users working over 55 months. The average time people contribute to Wikidata was four months
(median 1, interquartile range 1,3)

We called these roles contributor and leader. The large
majority of user/timeframes (771, 044) fell in the first role, characterised by lower levels of activity
for all variables. On average, contributors perform a lower number of edits, preferably without
semi-automated editing tools, and participate less in community discussions. Leaders have more
sustained editing activity and deeper engagement in community pages. They devote more effort
to revising properties and taxonomic relations (P31 and P279 statements)


Early editors are more likely to
take a leader role (Table 5), a behaviour that has been noted also among users of other platforms
(e.g. Reddit [4]) and may be explained by a self-selection bias, i.e. users arriving to Wikidata in its
early stage may be on average those who are more inclined to like it [4]

The Reader-to-Leader (R2L) framework  ategorises users into four roles, reader, contributor, collaborator, leader, ordered according to their centrality along a core-periphery axis. Readership may
prove difficult to detect in Wikidata, as the relevant data can be accessed through APIs and tools
that are much less mature than those used in this work


The minority of Wikidata editors who ever work as leaders move up and down between roles, seemingly ‘stepping up’ at some point to provide
greater support to the project.

# Comments

## Tags
- 1.2.4. Wikidata and Knowledge Graphs

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q58336167)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q58336167)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q58336167/P921%3BP4510)  
