
RegulonDB v 10.5: tackling challenges to unify classic and high throughput knowledge of gene regulation in E. coli K-12
=======================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q58611639]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2019  

# Highlights

We curated the literature to keep RegulonDB up to date, and initiated curation of ChIP and gSELEX experiments. We estimate that current knowledge describes between 10% and 30% of the expected total number of transcription factor- gene regulatory interactions in E. coli. RegulonDB provides datasets for interactions for which there is no evidence that they affect expression, as well as expression datasets.

At a higher level of integration, we report Genetic Sensory-Response Units for 200 transcription factors, including their regulation at the metabolic level, and include summaries for 70 of them. Finally, we summarize our research with Natural language processing strategies to enhance our biocuration work.

We have made important progress in implementing different components that allowed us to expand RegulonDB to include high throughput (HT)-generated knowledge. This included the design and implementation of the Microbial Conditions Ontology (MCO), which provides a formal framework and defines the set of properties necessary to specify the conditions as well as the genetic material used in a particular study, in order to adequately describe how an experiment was performed in a way that should satisfy its reproducibility.

We have progressed in expanding our curation to include publications based on HT technologies (4,17,18). This has been quite a challenge, since we do not want to dilute the solid knowledge accumulated through the years from molecular biology experiments with the new information from HT methodologies. 

In 2014, we initiated research in the use of Natural language processing (NLP) strategies to facilitate or accelerate our biocuration work, with an approach that helps us to extract the experimental contrasting variable in growth conditions from the literature (28). More recently, we focused in extracting biological processes of regulated genes and information on the structural domains of TFs, two features that are part of our TF extensive summaries

We recently reported curation of close to 50 publications based on HT methodologies including gSELEX and various ChIP (exo, chip, seq) experiments (4). Our work focused essentially in extracting those bound sites with enough information (sequence in the genome, as well as evidence of the effect on the downstream gene) to be identified as regulatory interactions. These are available with the rest of browsable elements in RegulonDB v10.5, and all other interactions reported in those papers are available as datasets (Figure 2)

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q58611639)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q58611639)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q58611639/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q58611639&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/NAR/GKY1077)  
