
Molecular Architecture of the Mouse Nervous System
==================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q58793343]  
  
Publication date : 09 of August, 2018  

# Highlights

Single-cell transcriptional profiling of theadult mouse nervous system uncoversnew cell classes and types acrossregions, providing a clearer picture of celldiversity by region and a reference atlasfor studying the mammalian nervoussystem.

--> Cool

We discovered seven distinct,regionally restricted astrocyte types that obeyeddevelopmental boundaries and correlated with thespatial distribution of key glutamate and glycineneurotransmitter

--> Super cool

e use the inferred molecular relation-ships between all cell types to propose a data-driven taxonomyof cell types, and we discuss the overall architecture of themammalian nervous system in light of this taxonomy.

C) Dendrogram describing the taxonomy of all identified cell types. Main branches, corresponding to the taxonomy, are annotated with labels and coloredbackground. The neurotransmitter used by each cell type is indicated below the leaves as colored circles. The lower panel indicates the developmentalcompartment of origin for each cell types

--> Tree is misleading, but a cool dendrogram

We performed a comprehensive annotation of the clusters us-ing a variety of automated and manual methods. We assignedeach cluster a unique mnemonic identifier (e.g., MBDOP1),descriptive name (‘‘midbrain dopaminergic neuron’’), majorclass (e.g., ‘‘neuron’’), neurotransmitter identity, putative devel-opmental origin, anatomical location, and region (Table S3)

Remarkably, wefound that 248 (93%) of all clusters were uniquely identifiablewith just two genes, while 17 required three genes and nonerequired  more than three (although adding  more genesincreased the robustness of identification).

--> Nice, relevant for  3.5. Practical applications of a pragmatic cell type definition in 2.4.4


n the subventricular zone,radial glia-like cells (RGSZ) and cycling neuronal intermediateprogenitor cells (SZNBL) were linked to more mature and pre-sumably migrating neuroblasts along the rostral migratorystream and in the olfactory bulb (OBNBL3). In the subgranularzone of the dentate gyrus, radial glia-like cells (RGDG), neuro-blasts (NBDG), and immature granule cells (DGNBL1 andDGNBL2) would give rise to mature granule cells (DGGC), asrecently described in detail (Hochgerner et al., 2018)

--> Nice, region-specific names

Three types of ependymal cells all expressedFoxj1, the mas-ter regulator of motile cilia (Yu et al., 2008). The first, EPEN, wascommon along the rostrocaudal axis. The second, EPMB, wasobserved in the dorsal midbrain and—to a lesser extent—the hy-pothalamus. They expressed high levels ofGfapand theEfnb3gene encoding Ephrin B3 but only low levels ofFoxj1. Theyalso expressed many markers of tanycytes of the third ventricle,includingNes,Vim,Rax, andGpr50(Miranda-Angulo et al.,2014), but their location in the dorsal midbrain suggests thatthey instead represented a tanycyte of the circumventricularorgans (Kettenmann and Ransom, 2013).


Here, we observed seven molecularly distinct types of astro-cytes with clear regionally specialized distribution. All astrocytesexpressedAqp4, encoding aquaporin 4, the water channellocated on astrocyte vascular endfeet. In addition to Bergmannglia of the cerebellum (ACBG), we found olfactory-specific astro-cytes (ACOB, unrelated to olfactory ensheathing cells; seebelow), two subtypes of telencephalon-specific astrocytes(ACTE1 and ACTE2), two subtypes of non-telencephalon astro-cytes (ACNT1 and ACNT2), and aMyoc-expressing astrocyte ofthe dorsal midbrain, ACMB. Mu ̈ller glia were not observedbecause we did not sample from the retina.

Telencephalon astrocytes ACTE1 and ACTE2 were distin-guished by the expression of several genes, includingMfge8andLhx2, and were found in the olfactory bulb, cerebral cortex,striatum, amygdala, and hippocampus but were absent from thehypothalamus, thalamus, midbrain, and hindbrain


anlandewijck et al. described two brain fibroblast-likecell types expressing fibril-forming collagens (e.g.,Col1a1,Col1a2), collagen fiber crosslinking proteins (Lum,Dcn), andthe platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha,Pdgfra, whichwas interposed between astrocyte endfeet and vascular endo-thelial cells. Brain fibroblast-like cells are likely identical to thevascular leptomeningeal cells (VLMCs) that we previouslydescribed in the mouse CNS (Marques et al., 2016). In the pre-sent dataset, we observed four types sharing the canonicalmarkers. Two types were distinguished by expression of genesincluding the pro-inflammatory cytokineIl33(VLMC1) and theProstaglandin D2 synthetasePtgds(VLMC2), the latter previ-ously found as the most highly enriched gene in mouse leptome-ninges (Yasuda et al., 2013)(Figure S3A)

Second, some—but only some—cell classes show area-spe-cific patterns of gene expression that likely reflect their develop-mental history. This trend was strongest among neurons, astro-cytes, and ependymal cells; by contrast, oligodendrocytes,vascular cells, and immune cells exhibited similar gene expres-sion patterns across brain regions. 


We have described the molecular architecture of the mammaliannervous system based on a systematic survey using scRNA-seq.

 summary, we provide a resource and an initial analysisrevealing key principles of the molecular diversity and composi-tion of the mammalian nervous system. The atlas can be used toidentify genes and gene combinations unique to specific celltypes, which in turn can be used to genetically target cells forvisualization, ablation, optogenetic manipulation, gene target-ing, and more. The atlas will also help us understand the functionof specific genes—for example, those implicated in disease(Skene et al., 2018). This can lead to actionable hypotheses onthe mechanism of disease, as well as identifying the relevantcell types to generate mouse models of human disease



 Additional Resources
 
 We provide a companion wiki athttp://mousebrain.org, with a report card for each cell type. The wiki can be browsed by taxon, celltype, tissue, and gene, with information on enriched genes, specific markers, anatomical location and more. The download section ofthe wiki makes available the following resources: (1) Aligned reads in the form of BAM files. (2) Quality-control results of each sample(10X Genomics Cell-Ranger QC output). (3) Expression data organized by individual Chromium sample, region, taxonomic group,and the entire final curated dataset. These files contain full metadata, graph layout, cluster assignments and cell type/state annota-tions, where appropriate.Expression data is provided in Loom format (seehttp://loompy.org) and comes with an interactive, web-based viewer for explor-ative analysis. The wiki provides links to relevant Loom files, preloaded in the Loom viewer.

--> Damn, that is really good


Expression values and metadata per cluster
113 MB

Available as a single file L5_All.agg.loom, with one cluster per column and one gene per row. Metadata is available as row and column attributes.
Suitable for exploring cell types. 
--> http://mousebrain.org/downloads.html
--> "explroing cell types" hmm I'd like to see the metadata
 
# Comments

Super good article.

Great source for new Wikidata/Cell Ontology classes  3.4. Single-cell RNA-seq data reconciliation to Wikidata

## Tags
1.4.2. A focus on single-cell RNA sequencing

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q58793343)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q58793343)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q58793343/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q58793343&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
