
The Development of Taxonomic Theory Since 1851
==============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q59058260]  

# Highlights
What, to put it crudely, did men like Robert Brown and William Hooker have at the back of thelr minds when they deserthed one of their countless new species, gonern or farnilles 7


Lindley did attempt to characterize further the concept, he Hnked it with the then commonly held belief in the existence of a plan of creation laid down, once and for all, by a Creator. This gave scope for his strongly heid conviction that, above the rank of species, which he regarded, of course, as fixed and wnchanging, taxonomie categories are man-made.

Lindley’s rather vague and mystical concept was re-interpreted in evohitionary terms.

Darwin himeelf, for exaraple, in the famous Chapter 14 of the “Origin of Species”, laid down that all trne classification is genealogical and that “community of descent is the hidden hook which naturalists have been unconsciously seeking’.

biclogists have almost completely ignored, or dismissed as irvelevant, the fundamental principles of classification which apply to all objects, whether ving or non- living, and which have been discussed and re-discussed by philosophers from the time of the Greeks until the present day.This isolation of biological from general classification has, in my view, been fatal to a proper appreciation of the aims and mothods of taxonomy andis largely responsible for the confusion. that oxists to-day.

--> This could have been written yesterday

‘The Principles of Science” by W. 8. Jevons (1874):
- Classifieation is a fundamental prerequisite of all conceptual thought.
- Tho primary function of classification is to construct classes about which we can make inductive generalizations.

--> Popperianly, this can be adapted to quasi-inductional generalizations.

- The particular classes we construct always arise in connexion with @ particular purpose.

- The classification that we adopt for any set of objects depends on the particular field in which we wish to make inductive generalizations.

- some classifications are of more general use than others. In the general theory of classification, classifications which serve a large number of purposes are called natural, while those serving a more limited number of purposes are termed artificial.
  
- there cannot be one ideal and abschute scheme of classification for any particular set of objects,

it can, I think, lead to a view of the aims of taxonomy more in line than ab present with modern philosophical hought in general and more useful in solving some
of the problems now confronting taxonomists— notably those problems concerned with the inecor- poration of recent data from experimental taxonomy into suitable taxonomic categories.

--> "Incorporation of recent data from experimental taxonomy into suitable taxonomic categories" is basically the challenge of single-cell transcriptomics.

Clearly, the primary aim of taxonomy, on this basis, must be the construction of classes of living things about which scientifically usefal inductive generalizations can be made.

This classification should not, however, be regarded ag an approximation towards a single, ideal scheme, but as a permanently fexible arrangement, changing as new knowledge is acquired and incorporated in it.

--> I'm 100% in line with that.

T believe i} is possible that, if we can once and for all lay the bogey of the existence oftrue relationship andrealize that there are, not one, but many kinds of relationship —geneslogical relationship, morphological relation- ship, cytological relationship, and so on-—we shall release ourselves from the bondage of the absolute in taxonomy and gain enormously in flexibility and adaptability in taxonomic practice.


# Comments

The classification of cell types themselves seems pre darwinian.