
The Species Concept Among Viruses
=================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q59063943]  

# Highlights
The term ‘species’ has been used to describe at least four different ideas :

(1) Linnzeus’s concept was close to the meaning ‘a distinct kind of creature’, that is, a group of organisms clearly separate from other groups of organisms.

(2) Geneticists consider a species as a ‘genetic isolate’ (with minor details of difference in definition) since—in organisms reproducing sexually.

3) Paleontologists use the word in sense (1) extended in time.

There is as yet no general agreement as to which use of the term ‘species’ is best for general adoption. For viruses, however, only usage (1) can be seriously considered at the moment.

Let us consider Casals and Brown’s B group of arborviruses®. All are related by tests involving hemagglutinin in- hibition. The group includes the yellow fever, West Nile, St. Louis, Japanese B, Murray Valley, Zika, dengue I, dengue II viruses and numerous others.

We have made a very preliminary attempt to compare, and if possible group, twenty-five viruses by means of an objective quantitative method!. This tries to group organisms by expressing their similarities quantitatively.

Bawden!® favours Mayr’s term ‘collective species’ to mean a collection of clones having many features in common; but this may in fact not be very different from the ‘group’ in animal viruses. He feels that to attempt to classify plant viruses on a phylogenetic basis is at present quite impracticable.

If virologists use the term ‘species’ for viruses they should be clear in which sense they are using it: at present, usages other than the Linnean seem to us guite unrealistic. We go further and suggest that at the present time the species concept should not be applied to viruses at all; further knowledge may, of course, change our ideas. 

# Comments
