
Transcriptomic and morphophysiological evidence for a specialized human cortical GABAergic cell type
====================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q60017992]  

# Highlights

rosehip cells show an immunohistochemical profile (GAD1+
CCK+, CNR1–SST–CALB2–PVALB–) matching a single transcriptomically defined cell type
whose specific molecular marker signature is not seen in mouse cortex

However, conservation of cellular and circuit principles in
human cortex is assumed but largely untested to date. Indeed, there is evidence for substantial neuronal differences between rodents and human;

evidence for identification of a cell type with human-specialized features.

--> Well, all human cell types have human-specialized features, I guess. 

microdissection of regions of interest from fluorescent Nissl-stained vibratome sections of cortex, tissue homogenization to liberate nuclei, NeuN staining and fluorescence-activated cell-sorting isolation,and Smart-seq2-based library preparation.

frozen postmortem brain specimens.

Fig1.d : Clusters arranged by transcriptomic similarity based on hierarchical clustering, with the expression distributions of selective marker genes shown across clusters as violin plots. Expression is on a linear scale and dots indicate median expression.

Based on expression of known marker genes (Supplementary Fig. 2a), clusters cor- responded to all major classes of neural cell types that were expected to be captured.

To summarize, this unbiased transcriptomic approach identified ten GABAergic interneuron subtypes in layer 1 that have distinctive combinatorial and specific gene expression signatures suggestive of distinct morphological and functional properties.

--> I found the "unbiased" wording very peculiar. 

We measured axonal bou- ton densities of rosehip (n = 6), neurogliaform (n = 4), and basket (n = 3) cells in 10-µ m-thick spherical shells of increasing diameter by Sholl analysis corrected with the portion of shells outside the brain slice.

To understand the molecular identity of RCs and link them to
the transcriptomic clusters, we performed immunohistochemis- try on electrophysiologically recorded and anatomically recovered cells for known markers of GABAergic cell types (see Methods for details)26
. This revealed that RCs were immunopositive for CCK (n = 10) but negative for CB1 cannabinoid receptor (CNR1, n = 11)

We attempted to find homologous cell types
between species by correlating the median expression of 212 cell- type-informative genes between all pairs of mouse and human clusters.


This putative rosehip transcriptomic type, one of the most distinctive layer 1 GABAergic transcriptomic types, expresses many other genes either highly specifically expressed or co-expressed in only one other layer 1 cell type. Notably, given the rosehip synaptic phenotype, these markers include many genes known to be associated with axon growth and synaptic structure and function, including synaptic vesi- cle glycoprotein 2c (SV2C), LAMP5, transient receptor potential cat- ion channel subfamily C member 3 (TRPC3), complexin 3 (CPLX3), neurotrypsin (PRSS12), netrin G1 (NTNG1), histamine receptor H1 (HRH1), receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor 2 (ROR2), somatostatin receptor 2 (SSTR2), and taxilin beta (TXLNB)

Many rosehip marker genes are not expressed in Smad3 or other Pvalb–Sst–Vip– mouse cell types. 

--> Interesting how the concept of multispecies genes is used calmly. The term "gene" has way too many different uses too. 

Brodmann Area (BA) 9 (frontal cortex) and BA40 (parietal cortex) using several combinatorial gene panels. We found that GAD1+ cells expressing rosehip marker genes with low or absent expression of CNR1 were present in layer 1 of both BA9 and BA40 (Supplementary Fig. 6), suggesting that this cell type is found in the cortical areas sampled for morphoelectric profiling

Conserved patterns of molecular and morphophysiological features for par- ticular cell classes have been reported, but interspecies variation and cell types potentially characteristic to several species have also been described.

Although the transcriptomic comparison is between human temporal cortex and mouse visual cortex, regional differences seem unlikely to account for this difference, as we found the anatomically defined rosehip type in multiple human regions.

--> Not very strong, but I see the point.

It is widely accepted that CCK+ cells in the rodent show selectively high expression of cannabinoid receptors and are involved in perisomatic inhibition. The bouton morphology and/or the com- pact axonal field of RCs resembles that of cell types described in deeper layers of the cat cortex that innervate relatively proximal dendrites (dendrite targeting and clutch cells). In contrast, RCs are CCK+ but cannabinoid receptor-negative, and appear to selectively target distal dendrites of pyramidal neurons.

A better understanding of human cellular and
circuit organization may help counteract the current lack of success in translating promising rodent results to effective treatment against human neuropsychiatric disorders
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q60017992)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q60017992)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q60017992/P921%3BP4510)  
