
A Taxonomic Problem
===================
  
  [@wikidata:Q60137015]  

# Highlights

AMONG present-day biologists there 1s widespread interest in, and considerable disagreement on, the proper relationship between taxonomy* and other branches of their science, especially genetics, cytology and ecology

In its simplest terms, classification consists in grouping individual objects (and, ultimately, sense data, expressed as qualities and relations) into classes, so that all the individuals in one class have certain attributes in common.

Ritchie (op. cit., p. 79) has ex- pressed this concept of classification as follows: ". . . our general knowledge of the external world as expressed by laws of nature is a product of the interaction of two processes, selection from and classification of what is experienced and the discovery of laws relating to the classes"

and logically any grouping of plants and animals should be considered a taxonomic process.

A natural classification is one founded on attributes which have a number of other attri- butes correlated with them, while in an artificial classification such correlation is reduced to a minimum.

It is impossible to con- struct a classification that i& not to some extent natural. As pointed out by Jevons (op. cit., p. 680), even in so artificial a class as those whose names begin with E, there will probably be an abnormally high proportion of Welshman owing to the presence of a large number of Evanses.

It is by a constant search for the most natural among these classifications that the present vast structure of traditional taxonomy has been gradually built up.

A natural classification differs in degree only from other biological classifications. This is in contrast to the concept, widely (though not universally) accepted in post-Darwinian times, of a natural classification as being based on actual phylogenetic relationship and thus differing funda- mentally from artificial classifications.


The categories and nomenclature of traditional taxonomy should be confined to the most natural dassification possible in the existing state of knowledge of any partim1lar group, on whatever attributes it may be based, and such a classi- fication would be the most generally useful for a great variety of purposes, both scientific and non- scientific.

Any exact definitions of the categories within this classification are, in my opinion, an impossibility. The categories, genus,.species, etc., are of the same nature as such categories as herd or heap, indi- vidual characters taking the place of individual animals or stones. A well-known trick in logic known as the 'sorites' illustrates this point. The question is put " Does one stone form a heap ?" If the respondent answer "No", it is asked, "Do two stones form a heap ?" and so on. Great difficulty is found in deciding when the addition of one stone constitutes a heap. The answer would vary from person to person and also according to the shape and size of the stones. Similarly, in a natural classification, the definition of the cate- gories must vary somewhat according to the mentality of individual biologists and the nature of the material being classified.

Many other classifications based on data provided by genetics, cytology and ecology have been proposed during this century•, but these have for the most part either redefined the categories of traditional taxonomy in such a way as to destroy their general usefulness, or have employed mixed attributes as a basis for new categories


# Comments

Sheds light on much of the current conceptions on taxonomy.