
The Bari Manifesto: An interoperability framework for essential biodiversity variables
======================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q60250756]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2019  

# Highlights

Well-designed data products developed in support of Essential Biodiversity Variables (EBV) can have an
extraordinarily positive impact on humankind’s ability to address today’s grand biodiversity and
environmental challenges

The Bari Manifesto offers ten principles to guide implementation of solutions aligned to supporting
production and management of EBV data products.

Essential Biodiversity Variables (EBV) are fundamental variables that can be used for assessing
biodiversity change over time, for determining adherence to biodiversity policy, for monitoring
progress towards sustainable development goals, and for tracking biodiversity responses to
disturbances and management interventions.

Table 2: Examples of key cyberinfrastructure/e-infrastructures supporting biodiversity science and
ecology and the principal services currently provided: C - Collection and organization of data; D -
Discovery and access via data aggregation or data federation; A - Analysis and/or visualization of
data; P - Data preservation; T - Training and education

Global Biotic Interactions (GloBI) D,A https://www.globalbioticintera


--> Nice table

Interoperability refers to the capacity of computers
and software to exchange and make use of data and information. This includes syntactic
interoperability where two or more systems use the same data formats and communication
protocol(s), and semantic interoperability when data are transferred meaningfully in a way that
allows the receiving system to correctly understand and use the data exchanged



7.1. Data management plan
P1. Projects or organizations developing EBV data products should have comprehensive data
management plans.

P3. EBV data products and the data from which they are generated should have associated
human- and machine-readable metadata that are compliant with accepted community standards
and sufficient for purposes of data discovery, access, fitness-for-purpose evaluation, citation,
interpretation and use

P5. EBV data products, component datasets, digital objects and other related services should
expose their capabilities and be accessible through common, standardized Application
Programming Interfaces.

P7. It should be possible to trace the EBV production process from the product back to the raw
data and to reproduce the process. Provenance information must be readable both by humans and
by machines.

7). In the longer term,
tools and libraries implementing the W3C PROV specifications (Missier et al., 2013), such as those
listed under the openProvance initiative (openProvenance, 2018) should be employed throughout
the production process to support automated provenance generation and tracking.


7.8. Ontologies/vocabularies
P8. EBV data products should be described by standard, openly accessible and machine-readable
vocabulary terms and conceptual relations (ontologies). These terms and relations should be
presented in a simple way to promote wide usage.
An extensible ‘EBV application ontology’ covering the main components of an EBV semantic layer
should be developed as an interoperable and complementary part of the Open Biological and
Biomedical Ontology (OBO) Foundry of ontologies (OBO Foundry, 2018a; Smith et al., 2007).
This ontology should, as far as possible, inherit from and coordinate with terms and concepts from
existing sources such as those of Biodiversity Information Standards (TDWG) and the biodiversity
science domain (e.g., Darwin Core (DwC) (Wieczorek et al., 2012), Biological Collections
Ontology (BCO) (OBO Foundry, 2018b; Walls et al., 2014), Environment Ontology (Buttigieg et
al., 2013, 2016; ENVO, 2018), Population and Community Ontology (PCO) (OBO Foundry, 2018c;
Walls et al., 2014), the OBO Foundry (OBO Foundry, 2018a; Smith et al., 2007) and the Semantic
Web for Earth and Environmental Terminology (SWEET) collection (SWEET, 2018). Persistent
efforts are required to converge or align the descriptions of primary data resources used in the
production of EBV data products and to encourage the widespread adoption and use of vocabularies
and ontologies by research communities because they are critical for successfully completing
complex data integration tasks. OWL (W3C, 2012) or SPARQL (W3C, 2013) traversal and
interpretation of metadata can be enabled by linking reference ontologies to metadata.

--> Yeah! Tag 1.3.1. OBO Foundry and biomedical ontologies

Considerable progress has been made in understanding how to operationalise the EBV concept, on
how BRIs can work together to implement procedures for constructing, publishing and preserving
EBV data products and how both policy authorities and scientific communities can benefit from a
dependable and stable body of EBV data products. A coordinated test on biodiversity change
related to invasive alien species in Australia recently demonstrated that EBV data products are
feasible in practice but significant challenges remain (Hardisty et al., 2018). ‘The Bari Manifesto’
has the potential to significantly improve the ability of biodiversity research infrastructures to
support the EBV production process, and to bring about general improvements in data
interoperability for biodiversity and ecological sciences
# Comments
Cool stuff.

## Tags
1.1.1

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q60250756)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q60250756)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q60250756/P921%3BP4510)  
