
STRING v11: protein–protein association networks with increased coverage, supporting functional discovery in genome-wide experimental datasets
==============================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q60469724]  
  
Publication date : 22 of November, 2018  

# Highlights
The STRING database aims to collect, score and integrate all publicly available sources of protein–protein interaction information, and to complement these with computational predictions. Its goal is to achieve a comprehensive and objective global network, including direct (physical) as well as indirect (functional) interactions. The latest version of STRING (11.0) more than doubles the number of organisms it covers, to 5090.

 The STRING resource is available online at https://string-db.org/.

From a purely functional perspective, proteins can even interact specifically without touching at all, such as when a transcription factor helps to regulate the expression and production of another protein, or when two enzymes exchange a specific substrate via diffusion

Arguably, the common denominator of the various forms of protein–protein associations is information flow

STRING is one of the earliest efforts (28) and strives to differentiate itself mainly through (i) high coverage, (ii) ease of use and (iii) a consistent scoring system. 

--> All 3 very nice features, by the way.

the website is currently accessed by around 3500 distinct users daily;


Together with other online resources (including the IMEx consortium, which is one of STRING’s largest primary data sources), the STRING database has recently been awarded the status of a European Core Data Resource by ELIXIR, a pan-European bioinformatics initiative dedicated to sustainable bioinformatics infrastructure (37). As a prerequisite and consequence of this status, all interaction data and accessory information in STRING are now freely available without restrictions, under the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) 4.0 license.


The basic interaction unit in STRING is the ‘functional association’, i.e. a link between two proteins that both contribute jointly to a specific biological function (38–40). For two proteins to be associated this way, they do not need to interact physically.

hree prediction channels based on genomic context information (see below), and one channel each for (i) co-expression, (ii) text-mining, (iii) biochemical/genetic data (‘experiments’) and (iv) previously curated pathway and protein-complex knowledge (‘databases’)

At last, for the text-mining channel, STRING conducts statistical co-citation analysis across a large number of scientific texts, including all PubMed abstracts as well as OMIM (53). Since version 10.5 of STRING, the text corpus also contains a subset of full-text articles

Over the coming years, the STRING team aims to continue tracking all available protein association evidence types and prediction algorithms.

# Comments

Well written, nice to read. Cool service, congratulations to everyone.
## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q60469724)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q60469724)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q60469724/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q60469724&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/NAR/GKY1131)  
