
Nanopublications: A Growing Resource of Provenance-Centric Scientific Linked Data
=================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q62924270]  

# Highlights
While the nanopublications format is domain-independent, the datasets that have become available in this format are mostly from Life Science domains, including data about diseases, genes, proteins, drugs, biological pathways, and biotic interactions. More than 10 million such nanopublications have been published

On the technical level, nanopublications are implemented with the help of named RDF graphs.

The assertion states that there is an interaction of type “interspecies interaction between organisms” (obo:GO_0044419) with two partici- pating organisms occurring in a place of “conifer woodland” (obo:ENVO_01000240) on a given day in 1962. We are further told that the interaction was in fact that one of the organisms ate the other, where the eating organism is described with the species label “Picoides villosus” and the eaten organism is classified under the genus with a certain taxonomic serial number (itis:114936) labeled as “Ips”. If we are wondering about how we happen to know about this particular “interaction”, we can look at the provenance graph, where we read that this assertion was derived from a study reported in a paper published in 1985.

Nanopublications are thereby identified by URIs that contain a hash value that is calculated on their entire content, whereby even minimal changes can be detected and users can formally verify nanopublication data against their identifier.

--> Super cool

On a more practical level, we developed a Java nanopublica-
tion library [16] and a command-line utility tool called npop2 to support the development of more high-level applications

Global Biotic Interactions (GloBI) is an initiative that aims to make existing species interaction datasets more easily accessible

These associations are now exposed as nanopublications, following the DisGeNET model (see [30] and below). The nanopublications represents the diseases with their OMIM identifiers, genes with their HGNC symbols (provided by Wikidata [26], [29].

prov reaches near-universal acceptance by occurring in 98.95% of all nanopublications in that position

The most frequent type, eco:ECO_0000218 representing “manual assertion”, occurs 8 828 067 times, whereas on the other end of the scale many types such as https://www.inaturalist.org/taxa/104422 (standing for Spotted Spreadwing, a species of damselflies) appear just once.

In order to facilitate easier and more powerful access to nanopublications, we also developed a Linked Data API to ac- cess the full set of nanopublications available on the network.

15 https://github.com/tkuhn/nanoresource

As future work, we have concrete plans to attract further datasets, including the entire Bio2RDF database and larger subsets of resources such as GloBI

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q62924270)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q62924270)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q62924270/P921%3BP4510)  
