
The challenges of big data biology
==================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q63241652]  

# Highlights


In other words, the networks of concepts associated with data in big data infrastructures should be viewed as theories: ways of
seeing the biological world that guide scientific reasoning and the direction of research, which are often revised to take into account new discoveries (Leonelli et al., 2011)

--> Points to Gene Ontology articles

Biological concepts – no matter how loosely defined – are always embedded in broader theoretical perspectives on how nature works.

Does a reliance on big data change the very idea of biological discovery and what counts as biological knowledge? 

One term may be used to refer to different processes, or different definitions may apply to the same term. 
This profound fragmentation, which philosophers call pluralism.

Databases need to be accessed through a common ‘query’ system. which terminologies should be used to classify the data and integrate them with other data?

The choice and definition of keywords used to classify and retrieve data matters enormously to their subsequent interpretation. Acknowledge that no data are ’raw’ in the sense of being independent from human interpretation.

Philosophers of science have argued that pluralism may be beneficial when attempting to extract knowledge about the highly complex and variable processes encountered in the life sciences.

Biologists often have feelings of unease about the quality of data and metadata found in online databases, particularly when the relevant data- bases are not curated by experts in the specific field and/or organism.

Data are ’relational’: in other words, the objects that best serve as data can change depending on the standards, goals and methods used to generate, process and interpret those objects as evidence.

Access to original samples also provides a concrete point of contact between research traditions and approaches.

Automated data analysis is an exciting prospect for biological discovery. 
Far from making human judgement unnecessary, the increasing power of computational algorithms requires a proportional increase in critical thinking.

Accepting a relational view of data means moving away from generic approaches to data curation towards context-sensitive approaches
that include fine-grained descriptors for the data, even though this may slow down the pace of research (Leonelli and Tempini, 2018). 

Philosophers have long discussed the theoretical significance of classification and naming practices in biology (Dupre´, 2001), often in collaboration with taxonomists, and occasionally with molecular and developmental biologists.

Collaboration between philosophers and biologists can foster essential reflection on which parts of data
browsing and integration should be conducted with the help of algorithms, and how results should be interpreted. 



# Comments

Philosophical insights to confront key challenges in biology - kind of the general idea of the Philosophy of biology session. 

Multilabel, single concept definitions (such as in Wikidata) might satisfy some of these issues

All data produced is stained by human interpretation. That explicits the need to have good definitions for concepts in single-cell biology to benefit from the data, even in the "raw" format. 


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q63241652)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q63241652)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q63241652/P921%3BP4510)  
