
OpenTapioca: Lightweight Entity Linking for Wikidata
====================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q63278360]  
  
Publication date : 19 of April, 2019  

# Highlights

We propose a simple Named Entity Linking system that can be trainedfrom Wikidata only. This demonstrates the strengths and weaknesses of this datasource for this task and provides an easily reproducible baseline to compare othersystems against

We review the main differences between Wikidata and static knowledge bases ex-tracted from Wikipedia, and analyze their implactions for entity linking. We illustratethese differences by building a simple entity linker, OpenTapioca1, which only usesdata from Wikidata, and show that it is competitive with other systems with access tolarger data sources for some tasks. 


Our goal is to evaluate the usefulness of this crowdsourced structured data for en-tity linking. We will therefore refrain from augmenting it with any external data (suchas phrases and topical information extracted from Wikipedia pages), as is generallydone when working with DBpedia or YAGO

Unlike Wikipedia’s page titles which must be unique in a given language, two Wiki-data items can have the same label in the same language. For instanceCurryis theEnglish label of both the item about the Curry programming language (Q2368856) andthe item about the village in Alaska (Q5195194), and the description field is used todisambiguate them.

As a Wikidata editor, the mainincentive to add aliases to an item is to make it easier to find the item with Wikidata’sauto-suggest field, so that it can be edited or linked to more easily.

--> I feel the same

The surface forms curated by Wikidata editors are sufficientto reach honourable re-call, without the need to expand them with mentions extracted from Wikipedia. Ourrestriction to people, locations and organizations probably helps in this regard and weanticipate worse performance for broader domains.

# Comments

## Tags

--> Open Tapioca ref 3.2.2.1. ANN

# Links 
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q63278360)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q63278360)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q63278360/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q63278360&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
