
Applying Citizen Science to Gene, Drug, Disease Relationship Extraction from Biomedical Abstracts
=================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q63640419]  
  
Publication date : 28 of February, 2019  

# Highlights
Here, we used the web-based applicationMark2Cure (​https://mark2cure.org​) to demonstrate that citizen scientists can performrelationship extraction and confirm the importance of accurate named entity recognitionon this task. We also discuss opportunities for future improvement of this system, as wellas the potential synergies between citizen science, manual biocuration, and naturallanguage processing.

Furthermore, NER and semanticannotation algorithms have expanded beyond the concept types originally explored by theBioCreative challenges and now include post-translational modifications (Sun, Wang and Li,2017), Gene Ontology terms (Ruch, 2016), metadata (Panahiazar, Dumontier and Gevaert, 2017),adverse effects (Cañada et al., 2017), and more (Tseytlin et al., 2016).


n this paper we describe the application of citizen science towards RE from biomedicaltext. Specifically, we 1. Provide a brief overview of the RE module within the Mark2Cureplatform, 2. Evaluate the ability of citizen scientists to perform RE taking into consideration thelimitations and ambiguities inherent in the system, and 3. Compare the citizen science generateddata with the automated results from SemMedDB to understand how the two may complementand enhance each other.

To identify missing relationship types, PMID-specific concept pairs annotated as ‘hasrelationship’ or ‘other relationship’ were aggregated to obtain the total number of users thatmarked each concept pair as having a non-specific relationship. At each voter threshold (K), up to25 PMID-specific concept pairs were randomly selected for qualitative review.

The PMIDs for the completed concept pairs were used to pull SemMedDB annotations specific tothose PMIDs. SemMedDB concept annotations are linked to Concept-Unique Identifiers (CUIs)from the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS). The UMLS integrates many biomedicalvocabularies and standards (Bodenreider, 2004). Since UMLS supports many more concept typesthan Mark2Cure, only UMLS concept types that mapped to Mark2Cure concept types wereincluded in the analysis


We found that citizen scientists were willing and capable of performing relationshipextraction (RE), and that the relationships they extracted from the full abstract was different thanthose obtained via automated methods like SemMedDB


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q63640419)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q63640419)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q63640419/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q63640419&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/564187)  
