
Identification of a regeneration-organizing cell in the Xenopus tail
====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q63979660]  
  
Publication date : 01 of May, 2019  

# Highlights


We sequenced
>13,000 cells, with at least two biological replicates
per condition, with an average of ~2300 genes
detected per cell (table S1). Cells from all samples
werepooledandvisualizedbythedimensionality
reduction method UMAP 

Although Lef1 is ex-
pressed in multiple cell types, only ROCs express
high levels of both Lef1 and Tp63 (Fig. 3A and fig.
S5A). 

ROCs are a signaling center
promoting proliferation
To understand the essential role played by ROCs
during regeneration, we used our scRNA-seq
data to dissect their transcriptional signature.
Ligands of signaling pathways that are known
to be required for regeneration and that in-
crease proliferating cell numbers, such as FGF
(15), BMP (5, 21), WNT (15), NOTCH (5), and
TGFb (20),aresimultaneouslyexpressedinROCs
but not in any other cell type. In c ontra st, re -
ceptors for these pathways are mostly expressed
in progenitor cell types (Fig. 5A and fig. S9)


In urodele limb regen-
eration, a similar structure, the apical epithelial
cap (AEC), is shown to be necessary for limb
regeneration (1). Although ROCs resemble AER
and AEC transcriptionally (e.g., Sp9, Msx2, Wnt5a),
we were not able to detect their well-known re-
gulators [e.g., Fgf2, Fgf4, Fgf8,andCx43(Gja1)]
(fig. S10A). Despite this, we hypothesized that
ROCs could play an instructive role during tail
growth by secreting growth factors and extra-
cellular cues in a manner similar to that of the
AER during limb growth, and we aimed to test
this using transplantation assays

The discovery of a single cell
type defining the wound epidermis offers a fresh
perspective on cell replacement therapies, sug-
gesting that “organizer grafts” mayonedayserve
as an alternative to full organ replacement in
regenerative therapies.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q63979660)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q63979660)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q63979660/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q63979660&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.AAV9996)  
