
Philosophical bias is the one bias that science cannot avoid
============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q64097527]  

# Highlights

’philosophical bias’. These are basic implicit assumptions in science about how the world is (ontology), what we can know about it (epistemology), or how science ought to be practiced (norms).

Doing science without making any basic philosophical assumptions is impossible.

Even if one does not believe that determinism or some other philosophical assumption is true in all situations, making such an assumption can still serve a purpose.

Philosophical premise is implicitly accepted in our theories and methods, it becomes a philosophical bias.

It could be argued that treating a patient on the basis of what works best for a group is an example of the ecological fallacy; that is, of inferring from group to individual. 

This inference is valid under a philosophical assumption called frequentism, accord- ing to which individual propensities are derived from statistical frequencies.

Explicating philosophical biases reveals competing perspectives .

Philosophical biases can influence the evaluation of scientific results.

Awareness of the bias is a necessary premise for any argument of a theory is better.

# Comments
About 27 references. Does not make any kind of quantitative experiment, mostly relying on arguments and well constructed paragraphs/ideas.

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q64097527)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q64097527)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q64097527/P921%3BP4510)  
