
Towards a classification of stem cells
======================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q64097544]  

# Highlights

Stem cells have traditionally been viewed as distinct from most other types of cells. Tools of metaphysics to describe a classification scheme for stem cells, a philosophical analysis of ’stemness’. Specific markers may help to distinguish and sort stem cells.

Discrete population of cells sitting at the apex of a hierarchy of irreversible cell differentiation

Intestinal cells could replace the stem cells tasked with renewing the lining of the bowel. Hematopoietic stem cells cannot be understood out of their context.

Stemness can be a
- ’categorical’ property, an intrinsic feature that is independent of any interaction with surrounding entities,
- ’dispositional’ property, an intrinsic feature that only manifests upon interaction with external stimuli. For example, a fragile item only breaks on impact.
- ’relational’ property that relies on the interaction between entities.
- a ’systemic’ property, defined as an extrinsic characteristic that is provided and maintained by the system.

Is stemness the same in cancers and their non-pathological counterparts? Does stemness remain the same type of property throughout disease progression?
Is stemness the same type of property in all types of cancers of a particular tissue? 

Choosing to target either cancer stem cells, their niche, or both, relies on implicit pre-suppositions regarding stemness.

Changes in the nature of stemness may require therapeutic adaptation. If changes in stemness are driving progression rather than resulting from it, therapeutic interventions that modulate stemness could also be beneficial.

Do they share some underlying characteristics that justify their biological clustering, or is ’stem cell’ just a convenient category to group cell types that are actually distinct? 

# Comments

No images needed. 

Any of the 4 views of stemness as property are compatible with valid definitions of stem cells. 
A final section with the practical aspects of the philosophical considerations

"Implicit pre-supositions" guiding many things. This is also clear in cell types!" 

Not necessarily a quest for the fundamental nature of cell types, but to practical considerations 

Do they share some underlying characteristics that justify their biological clustering, or is ’stem cell’ just a convenient category to group cell types that are actually distinct?  --> This question can be rearranged as :

How rigorous is the "stemness" criterion, when we have (at least) 4 different views of cell types? 


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q64097544)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q64097544)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q64097544/P921%3BP4510)  
