
Semantic integration of clinical laboratory tests from electronic health records for deep phenotyping and biomarker discovery
=============================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q64071540]  
  
Publication date : 02 of May, 2019  

# Highlights

Electronic Health Record (EHR) systems typically define laboratory test results using the Laboratory Observation Identifier Names
and Codes (LOINC) and can transmit them using Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resource (FHIR) standards

Here, we provide a method for mapping LOINCencoded laboratory test results transmitted in FHIR standards to Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) terms. We annotated the medical implications of 2923 commonly used laboratory tests with HPO terms.

Some report the value in mg/dL, whereas others report a
qualitative value of positive/negative. If any of these tests were
abnormal, the medical interpretation would be that nitrituria is
present, yet current informatics frameworks do not easily support
such inferences. Therefore, substantial challenges exist for
standardization and integration of laboratory data for deep
phenotyping and EHR-based translational research.

The HPO has become the de
facto standard for computational phenotype analysis in genomics
and rare disease.10–12 The HPO currently contains 14,184 terms
(February, 2019) including a comprehensive representation of
laboratory abnormalities such as hyperglycemia, thrombocytopenia, nitrituria, and increased urine alpha-ketoglutarate concentration.

For example, LOINC 32710-6 “Nitrite [Presence] in Urine” together
with the outcome “positive” implies the phenotypic abnormality
Nitrituria (HP:0031812).

--> LOINC is all rights reserved; what a mess...

In this report, we present an approach to the semantic integration
of laboratory tests and results in EHR data. Our approach connects
a widely used system for denoting laboratory tests, LOINC, with a
current standard for transmitting healthcare information, FHIR,
and a computational resource for deep phenotyping, HPO, that
was previously us

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q64071540)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q64071540)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q64071540&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41746-019-0110-4)  
