
Mining data and metadata from the gene expression omnibus
=========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q64119088]  
  
Publication date : 29 of December, 2018  

# Highlights

Here, we review methodologies developed to facilitate the systematic curation and processing of publicly available gene expression datasets from GEO. We identify trends for advanced metadata curation and summarize approaches for reprocessing the data within the entire GEO repository.

The uniformly reprocessed gene expression datasets can be organized into databases that serve as search engines that enable knowledge discovery at the data level. Prominent examples include ExpressionBlast (Zinman et al. 2013), Recount2 (Collado-Torres et al. 2017), ARCHS4 (Lachmann et al. 2018), and SEEK (Zhu et al. 2015). 

Therefore, there is an urgent need for better curating and annotating publicly available gene expression datasets at scale to enable better data reuse that can facilitate new discoveries.

Such mapping needs to be done to relevant community-accepted controlled vocabularies such as specialized ontologies available from the National Center for Biomedical Ontology (NCBO) BioPortal (Whetzel et al. 2011) and other community-accepted naming standards.

Three approaches are visualized as arrows: manual curation and automated NLP, both attempt to identify and extract structured metadata from the textual descriptions

Although not perfect, manual curation efforts applied to annotate GEO studies yield high-quality results. However, manual curation does not scale up to cover the tens of thousands of studie

Through a massive open online course (MOOC) on Coursera, we worked together with over 70 participants from over 25 countries to identify and annotate 2460 single-gene perturbation signatures, 839 disease signatures, and 906 drug perturbation signatures from GEO (Wang et al. 2016). The collections of these signatures are served as a web portal called CRowd Extracted Expression of Differential Signatures (CREEDS). 

e STARGEO project is a manual crowdsourcing curation effort that recruited graduate students to annotate samples with disease phenotypes (Hadley et al. 2017). Another similar effort called OMics Compendia Commons (OMiCC) (Shah et al. 2016) is a community-oriented framework that enables biomedical researchers to collaboratively annotate gene expression datasets and samples.


The manually curated GEO datasets facilitated the reanalysis of multiple related datasets to reveal novel biological insights

The leading effort is MetaSRA (Bernstein et al. 2017), a resource that normalized and improved the metadata from SRA. To achieve this, manual annotation of metadata applied to a small subset of SRA was carried out using ontologies for creating a training set. Then, by applying a computational model that implements a data structure called a Text Reasoning Graph, metadata labeling was automatically assigned to the remaining samples.


To prospectively improve the annotation quality of future datasets that will be deposited into GEO in the coming years, it would be a benefit to create a data and metadata submission system implemented with metadata standardization and validation capabilities

--> Yes!

With the FAIR guiding principles, the resultant improved curated public gene expression datasets will be integrated into an ecosystem of biomedical datasets and knowledge-bases for advancing biological discovery and for accelerating therapeutics development.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q64119088)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q64119088)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q64119088/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q64119088&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/S12551-018-0490-8)  
