
Determining cell type abundance and expression from bulk tissues with digital cytometry
=======================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q64109527]  

# Highlights
We now introduce CIBERSORTx, a machine learning method that extends this framework to infer cell-type-specific gene expression profiles without physical cell isolation. By minimizing platform-specific variation, CIBERSORTx also allows the use of single-cell RNA-sequencing data for large-scale tissue dissection.

ver the last decade, a number of computational techniques have been described for dissecting cellular content directly from genomic profiles of mixture samples. The majority of these methods rely on a specialized knowledgebase of cell-type-specific ‘barcode’ genes, often called a ‘signature matrix’, which is generally derived from fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)-purified or in vitro differentiated/stimulated cell subsets2,3

Here we introduce CIBERSORTx, a computational framework
to accurately infer cell type abundance and cell-type-specific gene expression from RNA profiles of intact tissues (Fig. 1)

c, t-SNE projection of scRNA-seq data from 23 HNSCC tumors9
(left) and training/validation approach for assessing
single-cell deconvolution performance (right). d, Concordance between cell type proportions measured by scRNA-seq and CIBERSORTx deconvolution for 20 held-out HNSCC tumors for validation from c. All

We observed substantial differences in the frac-
tional representation of B/T lymphocytes and macrophages when comparing predicted cell type proportions in bulk tumors and the
original scRNA-seq results

We therefore set out to evaluate whether a signature matrix, con- sisting of highly optimized marker genes, can be used to faithfully reconstruct cell-type-specific
transcriptome profiles from non-
disaggregated tissue samples, including fresh/frozen (FF) and fixed tumors (Fig. 3a)

--> That is cool

Moreover, the use of different single cell-derived signature matrices did not significantly impact results, provided that identical cell types were interrogated (Supplementary Fig. 5c)



our approach attempts to separate a single matrix of mixture GEPs into a set of underlying cell-type-specific expression matrices using imputed cell propor- tions (Fig. 4a,b). Once these expression profiles are obtained, they can be analyzed post hoc to gain insights into sample-level variation and patterns of gene expression for individual cell types of interest.

To test the method’s capability for ‘high-resolution’ cell purifica-
tion (Fig. 1), we created a series of synthetic mixtures, each contain- ing DEGs in one or more cell types. 
These DEGs were simulated to include overlapping block-like patterns, reminiscent of those seen in real tissues34–36
, and non-linear geometries, all of which would have
been difficult to ascertain by previous computational techniques. Remarkably, the method recovered expected DEG patterns in all tested cases, including an obscured target (‘bullseye’) (Fig. 4b–d and Supplementary Fig. 9). Moreover, unlike group mode (Fig. 1), the resulting high-resolution profiles were amenable to standard methods for unsupervised analysis (for example, Fig. 4c).


, Left: synthetic GEP matrix of four randomly admixed immune subsets, one of which contains DEGs in the shape of a bullseye (monocytes). Right: results of in silico purification. e,

--> lol, that is wild. Not very realistic, but looks super cool.

Using single-cell reference profiles from melanomas to build a signature matrix, we applied high-resolution expression purification to dissect eight major cell types from the
transcriptomes of 342 bulk melanoma tumors profiled by TCGA4.

While significant differences in performance between reference signatures derived from bulk populations and those derived from scRNA-seq data were not observed, the latter have several advan- tages for CIBERSORTx (Supplementary Note 2). These include (1) the ability to customize signature matrices for nearly any tis- sue type without the need for complicated antibody panels or cell sorting schemes and (2) the ability to study poorly understood or unknown transcriptional states at scale

In summary, CIBERSORTx represents a broadly applicable
framework for decoding cellular heterogeneity in complex tissues. This strategy can be used to ‘digitally gate’ cell subsets of interest from single-cell transcriptomes, profile the identities and expression patterns of these cells in cohorts of bulk tissue GEPs (for example, fixed specimens from clinical trials), and systematically determine their associations with diverse metadata, including genomic fea- tures and clinical outcomes.


# Comments

The use of "purification" to mean "digital purification" is a bit confusing.

Simulations  are a rich source, because they have to make assumptions clear, as demanded by machines. 

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q64109527)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q64109527)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q64109527/P921%3BP4510)  
