
SuperCT: a supervised-learning framework for enhanced characterization of single-cell transcriptomic profiles
=============================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q64106229]  
  
Publication date : 25 of February, 2019  

# Highlights

Characterization of individual cell types is fundamental to the study of multicellular samples. Single-cell
RNAseq techniques, which allow high-throughput
expression profiling of individual cells, have significantly advanced our ability of this task. Currently,
most of the scRNA-seq data analyses are commenced with unsupervised clustering

Clusters are often assigned to different cell types based on the
enriched canonical markers. However, this process
is inefficient and arbitrary. In this study, we present
a technical framework of training the expandable
supervised-classifier in order to reveal the singlecell identities as soon as the single-cell expression
profile is input. 

 First, the cell types were
not actually characterized by single-cell but by cluster. For
each cell type in the sample, it always requires a certain
number in order to form a discernable cluster. Second,
the layout of cells by DR and the resultant clustering are
model- and parameter-dependent. For example, the different distance/similarity metrics could result in different clustering effects (1–7).

Moreover, the cell-type assignment of
these clusters highly relies on the investigator’s familiarity
with its signature molecules. Without sufficient background
knowledge, the cell type, especially the rare types in a sample will be hard to identify, even though it could play critical
roles.


-->              1.4.2.2.1. Clustering algorithms
-->        2.4.2. Modern perspectives of classification of cells

Using a globally trained
SC model, the user may easily solve the cell-type classification problem in one single step

--> 2.4.4 and  3.5.1. Basic dictionary for cell type identification based on regular expression of cell type markers

Artificial NeuralNetwork (ANN). 


In this paper, we extensively examine the utility, the reliability, the compatibility and the expandability
of the SuperCT framework and demonstrate with a few explicit examples on how to characterize cell types and gain
unprecedented insights of cell biology


r. To enhance
the compatibility across different scRNA-seq platforms, we
convert the digital expression values to the binary values,
which means the genes are either present or absent in the
cells. As seen in most of the flow-cytometry analyses, the
present/absent of the signature gene provides adequate information to discern most of the known cell types. Therefore, it is believed that the dominant cell-type information
is preserved after the binary transformation. 

 Also, the binary signal input is compatible across most of the Unique Molecular-Index-based (UMI) scRNA-seq platforms with the robust performance of the cell-type classification.

 --> Yes! That is basically what fcoex is about. 


Top signature genes for each cell type ranked by information
gain
In order to calculate and rank the information entropy gain,
the following equations are used.


 --> So fcoex!


Cell-type-specific signature genes defined by SuperCT
As we know, each cell type has multiple signature genes
that dictate its function and reveal its identity. Although SuperCT did the classification work in a ‘blackbox’, we were
still able to uncover the signature genes by ranking the information gain of each gene’s presence/absence in discerning a
cell type from the other type

The top 50 genes for each of 37 cell
types are shown as examples in the Supplementary Table S2.

--> Well, that is also a good source for  3.1.  Cell-type markers in Wikidata

g. With least requirement of the expertise or the bioinformatics skillset from the individual user, the SuperCT classifier delivers accurate cell types information for thousands
of single-cells in just a few minutes.
A classifier with good performance is not built overnight.
Neither is it a one-size-fit-all model. It is actually the growing human knowledge that drives the machine learning,
which means a continual learning mechanism of this framework should be designed at the very beginning


fore the human cell atlas data is generated and released, we don’t have the comprehensive training dataset resources to cover too many human cell types


 It automatically generates hypotheses from
the available background knowledge and model(s), designs
physical experiments to test these hypotheses, carries out
the experiments on a laboratory robotic system, and then
analyses and interprets the results (see Figure 1). Because
computers are involved throughout, it is possible to explicitly capture every detail of the scientific discovery process:
goals, hypotheses, results, conclusions, etc. 

Here we describe our two prototype Robot Scientists,
'Adam' and 'Eve'. Adam has already proven itself by discovering new knowledge [24], whilst Eve is still under
development. Both robots are designed to carry out biomedical scientific research.

Figure 1 Hypothesis-driven closed-loop learning. Diagram showing how iterative cycles of hypothesis-driven experimentation allow for the autonomous generation of new scientific knowledge.

--> Also very nice figure 1.

Figure 2 Adam's laboratory robotic system. (a) An external view of Adam's laboratory robotic system, also showing Eve's on the far right, and (b) a
view looking down through the middle of Adam's robotic system, again with Eve's beyond.

. The growth curves are
smoothed, after which biologically significant parameters
are extracted and statistically analysed to determine
whether the original hypotheses have been confirmed or
refuted. Scientific knowledge gained from this process is
used to update the model of yeast metabolism. Full details
about all these processes can be found on the Robot Scientist website (see appendix note 1).


For Adam's most recent hypothesis generation work we have a detailed logical computer model of the metabolic reaction pathways in yeast (written in Prolog), from which locally orphaned enzymes are identified. The bioinformatics method of hypotheses generation attempts to use sequence similarity techniques to identify likely candidates for the ORFs that catalyse these reactions, thereby allowing the Robot Scientist to discover novel biology

Experiment design code then uses the system model to
generate biological experiment plans involving deletant
strains and metabolite solutions to test the hypotheses

--> Compelling case on the real worl usefulness of models

Formalisation We formalised the information related to
Adam's investigations. This was based on the generic ontology of scientific experiments: EXPO [32,33]. We developed a custom version of EXPO called LABORS (see
appendix note 5) which was tailored to formalise Adam's
experiments. We also developed an ontology to describe
experimental actions (both by humans and machines) called
EXACT [34].

Any automated scientific discovery system or Robot Scientist clearly has both advantages and disadvantages. Some of
the main points are discussed here.
It has been suggested that systems such as ours would be
better described as 'Laboratory Assistants' rather than the
implicitly more independent term 'Scientists'. Although in
some ways the term 'Laboratory Assistant' has some merit,
as they are not independent workers. In other, more important ways, the term is inappropriate as Laboratory Assistants do not generally form hypotheses, decide on the
experiments to test them, automatically analyse and interpret the results etc. It should also be remembered that thesesystems are still just prototypes, and it is probable that
future developments in hardware and software will increase
the independent nature of such systems. So, on balance, we
prefer the more evocative term 'Robot Scientist', and argue
that the Adam system has discovered new knowledge about
gene function in S. cerevisiae that has been independently
verified [24].



Louis Pasteur phrased this sentiment as 'In the fields of observation
chance favours only the prepared mind'. While it is true that
the underlying artificial intelligence components fail to
meet human expectations for innovative thought, we
believe that developing a richer background model and
incorporating more sophisticated reasoning mechanisms
will bring us closer to that goal.


Robot Scientists are the next logical step in laboratory automation. They can automate all aspects of the scientific discovery process: they generate hypotheses from a computer
model of the domain, design experiments to test these
hypotheses, run the physical experiments using robotic systems, and then analyse and interpret the results. They also have the potential to record every detail of what they have
done and why, enabling scientific investigations to be more
reproducible and reuseable. We look forward to a time
when Robot Scientists will commonly work with human
scientists to progress the path of science.


# Comments

--> Idea of a project: Topic page on automated scientific discovery.

## Tags
1.4.2.2. Computational analysis of scRNA-seq data
1.4.2.3. Cell label identification
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q64106229)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q64106229)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q64106229/P921%3BP4510)  
