
Cells in ExperimentaL Life Sciences (CELLS-2018): capturing the knowledge of normal and diseased cells with ontologies.
=======================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q64928913]  

# Highlights

The 2nd International Workshop on Cells in ExperimentaL Life Science (CELLS-2018) focused on two themes of knowledge representation, for newly-discovered cell types and for cells in disease states. The general discussion session focused on the ontology design patterns in representing newly-discovered cell types and cells in disease states.

Normalization of experimental cell data produced in different laboratory settings is difficult due to the non-synchronous nature of multiple laboratories working on similar questions on the same timeline.

The half-day CELLS-2018 workshop included five oral presentations and a general discussion session. Four of the proceedings papers, corresponding to four oral presentations, have been extended, further reviewed, and are published in this special issue for the CELLS-2018 workshop in BMC Bioinformatics.

In this workshop, two new ontologies were reported. Serra et al. presented the development of the Cancer Cell Ontology (CCL) that represents cancer cell types.
The other reported new ontology is the Ontology for Stem Cell Investigations (OSCI). 

The CLO-NICR development was one of the research efforts from the OntoChina (http://www.ontochina.org), a new initiative supporting an ontology developer community program in China to promote collaborative ontology development and applications around the world.

In a CELLS-2018 presentation, Vita et al. applied ontologies to connect cell population descriptions and gating definitions. In their study, ontologies were used to cross-compare cell types and marker patterns in the ImmPort Immunology Database and Analysis Portal. 

Mohamed Keshk of Richard H. Scheuermann’s group presented a provisional cell type ontology that represents newly identified novel cell types experimentally identified using single cell RNA sequencing (scRNAseq), an extension of the work Dr. Scheuermann’s group presented in the CELLS-2017 workshop.

- What is the difference between normal and diseased cells, and how to ontologically represent the transformation from a normal cell to diseased cell.

The community discovers new cell types based on subdividing known cell populations with additional markers. As we move beyond marker definition of cell types developed via flow cytometry to defining cell types via single cell RNA sequencing or proteomics, a cell type could potentially be defined by a combinations of hundreds of marker genes or proteins. 

As reflected by the work of Dr. Scheurmann’s group and others, we might therefore con- sider what constitutes the minimal combination set of markers that can uniquely define a new cell type.

Given the diversity of the experimental approaches for studying cells, we need to be careful in how we represent experimental results in the form of ontological definitions of cell types.

A variety of recent studies have discovered many new cell types, which sometimes show different characteristics in normal or disease states.

We anticipate promising research progress in the cell-related ontology field in the years to come.


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q64928913)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q64928913)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q64928913/P921%3BP4510)  
