
Wikidata from a Research Perspective -- A Systematic Mapping Study of Wikidata
==============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q66858157]  
  
Publication date : 29 of August, 2019  

# Highlights

In this study, 67 peer-reviewed research from
journals and conference proceedings were selected, and classified
into meaningful categories. We describe this data set descriptively
by showing the publication frequency, the publication venue and
the origin of the authors and reveal current research focuses. These
especially include aspects concerning data quality, including ques-
tions related to language coverage and data integrity. These results
indicate a number of future research directions, such as, multilin-
gualism and overcoming language gaps, the impact of plurality
on the quality of Wikidata’s data, Wikidata’s potential in various
disciplines, and usability of user interface


Thus, the provided data is already being used by other projects such as, WDAqua-
core6, WikiGenomes7 and Open Street Map8

. With this map-
ping study, we make the following contributions: (1) we provide an
overall overview of the current state of Wikidata research, (2) we
identify the research areas of Wikidata where research needs to be
deepen, and (3) we suggest future research areas.

In total, a majority of the 1,497 found articles were excluded and
only 67 papers remained in our sample. The reason for exclusion
of this large number of search results were that we carried out a
full text search of the term Wikidata. The search engines returned
results which contained this term, even if it was used only once. As
we intended to include only papers which focus solely on Wikidata,
we had to exclude a large number of results. Another reason was
that Google Scholar returned results which were not only papers.
Our further discussion is based on these 67 articles. The resulting
data set is available on Zotero16. All papers are also listed in the
references section. The ones marked with asterisk, are references
that are not part of the mapping study.

We found that Europe (70%) is the dominating contributor in Wiki-
data research, with Germany being the leading country and United
Kingdom the second. America (20%) has also contributed in research
focusing on Wikidata, with the US having the most contributions
(cp. Figure 3)

ne of the first articles on Wikidata is by Vrandečić, who mo-
tivates the need for integrating existing structured data from the
various Wikipedia language versions into one single repository
in order to overcome existing data inconsistencies [71]. The main
distinguishing features of Wikidata according to Vrandečić et al.
are, being available internationally and support for multilingualism,
storing links to facts as a secondary database, and the ability to store
contradictory facts to represent knowledge diversity [72]. Voß [70]
discusses extraction and classification of knowledge organization
systems based on Wikidata.

Zangerle et al. [76] evaluate recommender algorithms, which as-
sist Wikidata contributors in the process of data insertion through
property recommendation. Pellissier Tanon et al. [48] introduces
the Primary Sources Tool19 to facilitate the migration of the con-
tent from Freebase to Wikidata. Sergieh et al. [42] propose an ap-
proach to bridge the missing linguistic information gap of Wiki-
data by aligning Wikidata with FrameNet20 lexicon.


4.5.1 Data Quality. The research highlighted in this section, is
concerned with improving the data quality of the knowledge graph
by providing tools for Wikidata’s knowledge base.
Prasojo et al. [56] discuss “COOL-WD”, a tool for supporting
the completeness lifecycle of Wikidata and allow to produce and
consume completeness data by “data completion tracking, complete-
ness analytics, and query completeness assessment
Brasileiro et al. [9] discuss the quality of taxonomic
hierarchies in Wikidata to have a consistent data model and repre-
sentation schema

--> This one is really good


Continuous evolution is one of the design decisions of Wiki-
data, which means Wikidata grows with its community and tasks,
and new features are deployed incrementally [72]. The findings
suggest only little research on improving the usability of the user
interface

Thus, future directions of research on
Wikidata could be to: a) focus on multilingualism aspect of Wiki-
data and overcome language gaps, b) study knowledge diversity
and the effect of plurality on data trustworthiness of Wikidata, c)
research on improvement of the usability of user interface, and d)
investigate the usage of Wikidata in various disciplines and study
it from non-technical perspective.



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q66858157)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q66858157)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q66858157/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q66858157&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [Full text URL](http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.11153)  
