
Fish oil, Raynaud's syndrome, and undiscovered public knowledge
===============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q69703977]  

# Highlights

Divide and conquer—the strategy that science uses to cope with the mountains of printed matter it produces—appears on the surface to serve us well. Science organizes itself into manageable units—scientific specialties—and so its literature is created and assimilated in manage- able chunks or units. But a few clouds on the horizon ought not to go unexamined. First, most of the units are no doubt logically related to other units. Second, there are far more combinations ofunits, therefore far more potential relationships among the units, than there are units. Third, the system is not organized to cope with combinations. I suggest that important relationships might be escaping our notice.

These two ideas—the fish oil/blood connection and the Raynaud/blood connection—are each supported by a substantial body of scientific evidence and literature; each idea separately represents knowledge that is publicly available. What is notable about the two ideas is that, apparently, they have not heretofore been brought together in print. Together they obviously suggest the hy- pothesis that dietary fish oil might ameliorate or prevent Raynaud's syndrome.

So far as I have been able to determine, that hypothesis also has never appeared in print. In

The two main groups ofpapers in the attached list ofreferences—the
fish-oil group [1—25] and the Raynaud group [26—59]—were selected specifically for their logical connections.  Yet none of the articles in the first group mentions or refers to any Raynaud work, and no article in the second group mentions or refers to research on fish oil.

For the fish-oil/Raynaud literatures, the time period from about 1976 to 1984 provided the foundation of logical connections; the few literature links that have appeared in 1984 and 1985 perhaps herald a chain reaction in 1986 and beyond.

In sharp contrast to the scarcity of linkage through references and citations, there are many logical connections between the fish-oil and Raynaud literatures. My purpose in the next two sections is to document the strength of those connections.

I suggest, therefore, that we consider the hypothesis I have pro-
posed—that dietary fish oil might benefit Raynaud patients—as already implicitly existing before I proposed it. I have only made it explicit. Moreover, I do not know whether it has ever before been discovered in the subjective sense. I suspect that the idea is obvious and may well have been noticed by others who have read the scientific literature on both fish oil and Raynaud's disease; but if so, they do not seem to have recorded or reported it.

It seems inevitable that, within the abstract world of objective knowl-
edge (World 3), other implicitly existing hypotheses await discovery, and that such hypotheses have not yet been discovered because the logically related parts that make them obvious have never been retrieved and assembled—they have never all become known to any one person. I have more fully developed that idea in a separate paper, in which the hypothesis here discussed is alluded to as one among several examples intended to show that there can exist such a thing as undiscovered public knowledge [67].


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q69703977)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q69703977)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q69703977/P921%3BP4510)  
