Evidence-based illiteracy: time to rescue "the literature"
==========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q73858433]  
  
Publication date : 01 of February, 2000  

# Highlights
That oft-evoked entity “the literature” has, I submit, been
corrupted by a language created by people who write not
to be read but to be cited. 

The reluctance to take up Healy’s suggestion confirms
the observation of the editor of Nature that scientific
papers serve the needs of their authors above those of their
readers.

You may recognise the style because I did not invent it. I
spread a month’s supply of journals across a table, opened
them randomly, then used phrases plucked from the open
pages to encode Marsden’s original message.

The language created by people engaged in a ridiculous
chase to publish papers perverts the craft by which I earn
my living. 
--> Duríssimo!


It is indeed an example of decorated municipal gothic
(DMG),6 a prose style in which words are used not
because of their meaning but because they are thought to
enhance the image of their author or utterer

I recently read in a journal: “A higher proportion of the young
female population is now smoking cigarettes”, and
wondered why the author had not written, “More young
women now smoke cigarettes”. 

People who write
in the hope of being read need to be conscious of their
audience and use language that will hold its attention.
Those who write only to be published are free from this
tiresome restraint. 

I wonder do the citation seekers ever consider the plight of
us poor readers, deafened by the hoovering up of data,
blinded by cuttlefish ink, and struggling to survive in a
world that equates data with knowledge? Small wonder
that many of us fear that our minds are growing as cluttered as our journals


I read in an editorial,
“Elderly people want the dignity of choosing for themselves the type of care they receive by buying it rather than
having “assessed care packages” doled out by social
services”,10 and heard a real person talking to me. But as I worked my way towards the centre of the journal my
thoughts were soon deadened by the insistent drone of
DMG: “Therefore, to maximise the likelihood of a clinical
guideline being used we need coherent dissemination
and implementation strategies to capitalise on known
positive factors and to deal with obstacles to implementation”.

The stories of our lives are by definition
anecdotal and, in modern journals, anecdote carries less
weight than ill-digested data. So we have to rely on poets,
novelists, and screenwriters to help us try to undersand
our patients’ feelings of regret, betrayal, fear, loneliness,
and all the other perplexing emotions that can turn the
same disease into a different illness in different people.




# Comments
## Tags
- 1.1. The quest for interoperable knowledge

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q73858433)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q73858433)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q73858433&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(00)82040-1)  
