
FAIR Principles: Interpretations and Implementation Considerations
==================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q76394974]  
  
Publication date : 31 of January, 2020  

# Highlights
The FAIR principles have been widely cited, endorsed and adopted by a broad range of stakeholders since their publication in 2016. By intention, the 15 FAIR guiding principles do not dictate specific technological implementations, but provide guidance for improving Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability and Reusability of digital resources.

We introduce the concept of FAIR implementation considerations to assist accelerated global participation and convergence towards accessible, robust, widespread and consistent FAIR implementations. 

The four foundational principles – Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability and Reusability – describe the core objectives of the principles that, if achieved, should enable machines to make optimal use of data resources. In layman's terms: FAIR requires that “the machine knows what we mean”. 

A common example of a useful identifier is the Digital Object Identifier (DOI) which is guaranteed by the DOI specification to be globally unique and persistent.

Examples of metadata schemata can be found in FAIRsharing⑤ [18][19] and include for instance the Data Documentation Initiative (DDI)⑥, the HCLS Dataset Descriptors⑦, and many domain-specific “minimal information” models that have been invented.

An example of a generic searchable resource that supports manual exploration is Google Dataset Search⑨; however, this suffers from several of the problems mentioned above, in particular, that it indexes only certain types of metadata (schema.org) and the search cannot be automated under the Google Terms of Service, and therefore cannot be implemented within FAIR software.

The most widely-accepted choice to adhere to this principle, at the present time, is the Resource Description Framework (RDF) which is the W3C's recommendation for how to represent knowledge on the Web in a machine-accessible format⑭. Other choices may also be acceptable, for instance when they are already in widespread use within a given community. In that case, it would be helpful for the community to also provide a “translator” between their preferred format, and a more widely used format such as RDF.

Ontologies defined in the “Web Ontology Language” (OWL)

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q76394974)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q76394974)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q76394974&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1162/DINT_R_00024)  
