
The use of models in bacterial classification
=============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q78658697]  

# Highlights
It should be noted that the tests used are selected, and therefore are biased;
the use of these tests cannot show whether the groups are valid taxa, since this prejudges the question.

Cartesian co-ordinates of the model of enterobacteria

These co-ordinates are the distances in cm. of the balls in the model (Pl. 1, figs. 2,3) given in three axes at right angles to one another. The origin is the ball 6, representing Klebsiella

The older schemes of bacterial taxonomy may be more of a handicap than a help in the future. A new general taxonomy of bacteria has not yet been developed.

It is also not unusual to be unable to identify a well-known bacterium when it has been isolated from an unusual habitat.

This compression, with subsequent dis- tortion, into two dimensions (as in taxonomic trees) or into three (as in the models) is, however, essential for handling and publishing taxonomic data. It would ideally be carried out by the mathematical procedure of Principle Component Analysis.

--> Maybe one of the oldest mentions of PCA to visualize groups of organisms from higher dimensions?

The great majority of such distances were close to those implied by the S values, though in a few the differences were over 2.5 cm. (corresponding to 25
yo 8). In the best possible model these discrepancies would be as small as possible.
# Comments
I did not expect to see physical models! I thought it would be theoretical.