
The moral status of animals
===========================
  
  [@wikidata:Q79763269]  

# Highlights

The audience, moved to pity and anger by their plight, rose to curse Pompey — feeling, wrote Cicero, that the elephants had a relation of commonality (societas) with the human race.

there is no obvious reason why notions of basic justice, entitlement, and law cannot be extended across the species barrier, as the Indian court boldly did.

Sympathy, however, is malleable. It can all too easily be corrupted by our interest in protecting the comforts of a way of life that includes the use of other animals as objects for our own gain and pleasure. That is why we typically need philosophy and its theories of justice. Theories help us to get the best out of our own ethical intuitions, preventing self-serving distortions of our thought.

I consider three urgent problems of justice involving large asymmetries of power: justice for people with disabilities, justice across national boundaries, and justice for nonhuman animals.

a “capabilities approach” I have developed provides theoretical guidance. It begins from the question, “What are people actually able to do and to be?”

Stoic views of animals fit better than others with the Judeo-Christian idea that human beings have been given dominion over animals

Kant argues that all duties to animals are merely indirect duties to human beings.

What choice will maximize the satisfaction of the preferences of all sentient beings? That calculation, he believes, would put most of our current pain-inflicting use of animals off limits.

allow results in which a small number of creatures have very miserable lives, so long as their miseries are compensated for by a great deal of pleasure elsewhere.

--> This is a matter of fine tuning the theory, so miserable lifes cannot be outweighted ever. 
No need of a linear relation, whatever that means.

Even a comfortable immobility would be wrong for a horse, an elephant, or a gorilla. Those creatures characteristically live a life full of movement, space, and complex social interaction. To deprive them of those things is to give them a distorted and impoverished existence.

Utilitarian views are highly vulnerable on the question of numbers. The meat industry brings countless animals into the world who would never have existed.

--> Negação de seleção natural e seleção sexual. A liberdade das populações de, ao longo de eras, se moldarem ao ambiente. O indivíduo é privado de um direito essencial de todo ser vivo, que seria um direito a pressão seletiva adaptativa. Será? Por que isso seria um direito?

Uma resposta é que isso beneficia a manutenção da vida como um elemento do universo. É dificil justificar a manutenção da vida no universo, por enquanto eu aceito como um princípio moral auto-definido.  

I argue that it is a waste and a tragedy when a living creature has an innate capability for some functions that are evaluated as important and good, but never gets the opportunity to perform those functions. Failures to educate women, failures to promote adequate health care, failures to extend the freedoms of speech and conscience to all citizens — all those are treated as causing a kind of premature death, the death of a form of flourishing that has been judged to be essential for a life with dignity.

--> I like the concept of flourishing. As an utilitarian, I'd say that the idea of maximizing flourishing seems more precise towards what I believe than maximizing happiness. Happiness is but one aspect of flourishing. 

Each form of life is worthy of respect, and it is a problem of justice when a creature does not have the opportunity to unfold its (valuable) power, to flourish in its own way, and to lead a life with dignity.

--> Life flourish. All forms, all ways, forever. I like that. And then we can abstract pain as anything that reduces a chance of one individual to flourish. 


But what sort of difference is relevant for basic justice? Singer, following Bentham, puts the issue in terms of sentience.


# Comments
- Maria Elice mencionou uma ideia de antropocentrismo bondoso.
