
What Is Your Conceptual Definition of "Cell Type" in the Context of a Mature Organism?
======================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q87649649]  

# Highlights

Hans Clevers: Hard-wired characteristics ("fate”) + softer features such as morphology, gene expression, location, function, and plasticity.

Susanne Rafelski:  Cell-to-cell variation blurs the lines among cell types and introduces the notion of cell state. Classify cells with a multiscale and multiparameter cell-type space with vectors for key organizational, dynamic, and functional features as well as location, gene expression, etc. Some well-defined groups and some cells lying on a continuum.

Michael Elowitz: Previous notions of cell type don’t always make sense. We should classify cells more like demographers classify people. And as with people, history matters with cells. 

Allon Klein: The concept of “cell type” is poorly defined, but useful. We focus on defining coordinates underlying “cell states.”\textbf{ Cell types have been defined by morphology, ontogeny, function, or molecular composition. No single attribute has served. Coherent patterns in single-cell data serve to define “cell states.” The hard work is relating cell states to “cell types.”.\textbf{We will also find cells that associate with two or more classical “cell types.” Cells rest on a continuum manifold of cell state, cell type divisions are artificial.

Jay Shendure and Cole Trapnell : Slippery concept of “cell type.” Because its complete cell lineage history is known and extensively annotated with functional information, C. elegans. Develop methods and agree on principles that support a cellular taxonomy for C. elegans.

Ed Lein: The concept of “cell type” reduces complexity. A neuronal type could be a genetically encoded circuit element, while an elegant taxonomy should reflect cells’ developmental origin, connectivity, and function. A testable definition of “cell type” is a set of cells with a common transcriptomic signature and low variation in other phenotypes (including connectivity).

Emma Lundberg and Matthias Uhlen: The definition of a cell type should be attributed to its specialized cellular function. Robust classification of a cell type needs  a systems level view of the cell's function.

Alfonso Martinez-Arias: A cell should be defined for what it does, by its phenotype. What we really need is some conceptual breakthrough that allows us to link the molecular make up of a cell to its physiology.

Joshua R. Sanes:  Cell types would ideally be defined by function. However, classification must be based on morphological, physiological, or molecular properties. We can learn from taxonomy (related to species).

Paul Blainey: Cells of a type are functionally equivalent.  We must account for dynamic rhythms in the functional properties of cells,how they interact with neighboring cells and surrounding matrix, their diurnal cycles, and their response to the changing nutritional and activity states of the organisms in which they reside.

James Eberwine: The functional cell type that is of most interest. Therefore, the best descriptor of cell type may be a dynamical measure of the rates of the cellular constituent changes giving rise to particular physiologies.

Junhyong Kim: In biology, a classic “type” problem is “What is a species?”. Applying “closely resembling cells” is appealing but difficult. As found in systematics, a universally satisfying definition of types is not likely to be possible. What cellular properties are important? The properties relevant to the system-level roles of a cell.

J. Christopher Love: To define a cell type requires first considering what a cell is. It samples its environment, and  responds to those inputs, modifying its “state” on a variety of timescales. Redefine the meaning of cell type to encompass dynamic landscapes.

# Comments

Lots of good points. Functional definitions seem to be really important. Discussion about states is also present. Comments point also to the need of the classifcation to be useful do describe the biology of the organism. 


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q87649649)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q87649649)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q87649649/P921%3BP4510)  
