
Single cell transcriptomics in neuroscience: cell classification and beyond
===========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q88605805]  

# Highlights

Biology has been facing a daunting problem since the cell was understood to be the building block of metazoans: how do we study multicellular systems, when a universal approach to characterize their building blocks and classify them does not exist?

--> For me, this "building blocks" idea is complicated. Individual cells are alive individually, they just cooperate. They are eusocial, if you will. 

Here, I review the application of single cell transcriptomics to cell classification in neuroscience and its corollaries: the differentially expressed genes discovered in this process are a treasure trove for understanding cell type function and enabling specific access to those types.

Genes and their differential expression underlie different cellular phenotypes, and therefore, classification based on genome-wide gene expression should distinguish many, if not all, aspects of the cellular phenotype.

Cell type definition has been discussed and debated [14], and several themes in cell classification have emerged:

14. Armananzas R, Ascoli GA: Towards the automatic classification of neurons. Trends Neurosci 2015, 38:307-318.

Intuitively, and in agreement with the data, cell-type classification has a hierarchical structure (Figure 1): a useful analogy is to consider cell types as species [1]

--> Figure 1 is clearly single-inheritance. This is not enough, we need multiple inheritance.

However, the finer divisions (e.g., genus-level or species-level) can be more diffi- cult to detect due to technical limitations of the methods for measuring cellular phenotypes and, in fact, may not be hierarchically organized. This is where the distinctions of types versus states, and continuous versus discontinuous variation are frequently dis- cussed [15]

--> May be or may not be, this is not a rigid fact of nature. Classification systems are human made.

We have pro- posed distinguishing types and states, in principle, based on reversibility: states (e.g., circadian changes in transcription) are reversibly accessible to a cell, while a type is a region of a multidimensional space that encompasses the states and is constant within a certain time window.

--> Good only on obvious cases, still fails at edges

single cell profiling methods provide insights into cellular heteroge- neity, which is a combination of discrete and continu- ous variation, and it represents both cell types and states.

2. Classification based on one type of property (i.e., single cell RNA-seq) should be treated as one classification in a subspace of a larger, multidimensional space of cellular phenotypes, and as a working hypothesis that will be compared and attempted to be reconciled with other data types and in other subspaces (e.g., morpho- logical feature space)

--> Yes! Fully agreed. 
Ulti- mately, a key goal will be to perform integrative/ holistic cell type classification using multiple data types

With the inception of large concerted efforts, like the Human Cell Atlas, a concept of ‘Sky Dive’ has emerged: first obtain a coarse look of the landscape and then focus on the landing site, as if jumping (with a parachute) from a plane [48].

How many cell types are there? Due to the high publica- tion rate in the field, attempts to catalog the advance- ments become outdated as soon as they are published [7].

It is important to evaluate the confidence in gene expres- sion patterns obtained by scRNA-seq, the derived classi- fication and its implications. At the level of the data themselves, confirmation by RNA in situ hybridization (ISH) is recommended and frequently performed.

Frequently, intersectional genetic tools are key to specific cell-type access, as individual marker genes rarely provide unique access to an individual cell type.

The future studies involving single-cell transcriptomics will provide unprec- edented comparisons across species, insights into disease, evolution, and mechanisms of cell, organ and organism function [53,97,98]. What an exciting time for biology!


References and recommended reading Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review, have been highlighted as:
? of special interest ?? of outstanding interest

--> Very nice system for highlighting important references!

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q88605805)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q88605805)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q88605805/P921%3BP4510)  
