
A comparison of automatic cell identification methods for single-cell RNA sequencing data
=========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q89998341]  

# Highlights
Here, we benchmarked 22 classification methods that automatically assign cell identities including single-cell-specific and general-purpose classifiers. The performance of the methods is evaluated using 27 publicly available single-cell RNA sequencing datasets of different sizes, technologies, species, and levels of complexity.

We provide a Snakemake workflow to facilitate the benchmarking and to support the extension of new methods and new datasets.

Manual annotations, which are often not based on standardized ontologies of cell labels, are not reproducible across different experiments within and across research groups.

Here, we benchmarked 22 classification methods to automatically assign cell identities including single-cell- specific and general-purpose classifiers.

Classifiers were divided into two categories:
 - supervised methods which require a training dataset labeled with the corresponding cell populations in order to train the classifier or
 - prior-knowledge methods, for which either a marker gene file is required as an input or a pretrained classifier for specific cell populations is provided

 PanglaoDB and CellMarker often provide different markers for the same population. For example, CellMarker provides 33 marker genes for B cells, while PanglaoDB provides 110 markers, with only 11 marker genes overlap between the two databases.

 The cell population annotation for all datasets was provided with the data, except the Zheng 68K dataset, for which we obtained the cell population annotation from https://github.com/10XGenomics/single-cell-3prime-paper/ tree/master/pbmc68k_analysis. These annotations were used as a “ground truth” during the evaluation of the cell population predictions obtained from the classification methods.
 
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q89998341)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q89998341)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q89998341/P921%3BP4510)  
