
Identification of region-specific astrocyte subtypes at single cell resolution
==============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q90091126]  

# Highlights
Astrocytes, a major cell type found throughout the central nervous system, have general roles in the modulation of synapse formation and synaptic transmission, blood–brain barrier formation, and regulation of blood flow, as well as metabolic support of other brain resident cells

--> "major"

s. Our findings are evidence for specialized astrocyte subtypes between
and within brain regions. The data are available through an online database (https://holt-sc.glialab.org/), providing a resource on which to base explorations of local astrocyte diversity and function in the brain

--> Shiny App. Nice that they show multiple animals!

Single-cell analysis approaches are revolutionizing our concepts of cell identity and heterogeneity

Astrocytes were then specifically labeled with the ASCA-2-PE antibody and single cells were deposited in individual wells of a PCR plate using FACS.

Gene expression heatmap for higher-order cell types (columns) grouped according to the
Seurat classification shown in Fig. 1c. Color-coding from Fig. 1c is retained. Gray, no expression; yellow, low expression; red, high expression, In-normalized
gene expression data is sho

Cell-type identification was based on the expression of
known marker genes (Fig. 1c). Following removal of contaminating cell types, 1811 astrocytes remained. These cells were then
reclustered, based on the 886 highly variable genes expressed
across astrocytes (see Methods for more details). This led to the
identification of five distinct Astrocyte SubTypes (AST1–5), each
distinguished by a gene expression fingerprint (Fig. 2a, b).
T-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (tSNE) plots
showed three major “clouds” of cells. AST4 and AST5 formed
distinct clusters, suggesting distinct molecular fingerprints. In
contrast, ASTs 1–3 were grouped together, suggesting much more
subtle differences in gene expression between these subtypes
(Fig. 2a and Supplementary Fig. 8).

--> Confusion between cluster and cell type.


d Expression
of subtype-specific marker genes selected for in situ hybridization experiments. Markers are classed as absent/low “−” or highly expressed “+,” based on
ln-normalized expression data.

--> Markers are a bit arbitrary. ISH types not the same as scRNA-seq types.

Hence, our data further confirm the molecular heterogeneity of
astrocytes. This heterogeneity encompasses well-recognized astrocyte functions and exists both between and within brain regions

Mature astrocytes: ASTs 1, 2, and 3. In contrast, AST1, AST2,
and AST3 showed gene-enrichment profiles more consistent with
mature astrocyte function

AST1 is defined by high expression of Gfap and Agt, and was
found at high levels in the subpial layer and hippocampus—both
in terms of absolute distribution and normalized to total astrocyte
number (Fig. 5a and Supplementary Figs. 10, 12, and 13). 

--> Explicit definition! That is cool.

Fig. 7 Schematic summary of astrocyte subtype positions in adult mouse brain. Indicated positions are based on in situ hybridization data (Figs. 4–6) and
are marked on a representative sagittal section of adult mouse brain (adapted from the Allen Mouse Brain Atlas). Subtypes are color-coded (as in Fig. 2a).
Scale bar, 500 µ

--> Cool schematic. 


The relationship between AST2 and AST3 remains unclear at
present, although a number of possibilities exist. These subtypes
could be formed from a common class of progenitor, defined by
early patterning events and diversified by cues from neighboring
CNS cells, such as neuronal release of sonic hedgehog (Shh)49,50.
Alternatively, they may be formed from distinct classes of progenitor, which intermix in the cortex51

--> Interesting that they are immediately regarded as fixed ("identities") and not interchangeable ("states")

In summary, we have demonstrated both inter- and intraregional heterogeneity of astrocytes and have shown distinct
cortical layering and hippocampal compartmentalization of these
unique subtypes. Furthermore, we provide evidence that these
subtypes possess distinct morphologies and physiologies. This
work provides a highly resolved roadmap for future investigations
of astrocyte heterogeneity. Freely available as an online resource,
our data allow the development of testable hypotheses relating to
astrocyte properties, which will ultimately allow their effects on
CNS form and function to be elucidated. Such information will
prove invaluable to our overall understanding of brain activity in
both healthy and diseased states.

# Comments

Makes heterogeneity super clear.

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q90091126)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q90091126)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q90091126/P921%3BP4510)  
