
Supervised classification enables rapid annotation of cell atlases
==================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q90003307]  
  
Publication date : 09 of September, 2019  

# Highlights

We describe Garnett, a tool for rapidly annotating cell types in single-cell  transcriptional  profiling  and  single-cell  chromatin  accessibility datasets, based on an interpretable, hierarchical markup language of cell type-specific genes

ig. 1 |Garnett accurately classifies peripheral blood mononuclear cells.a, Overview of the Garnett algorithm (Methods). 

--> 3.5.3. R package for rule-based identification of cell types, super cool, super understandable.
b, t-SNE plots of 10X Genomics’ 100,000 cell PBMC dataset (n= 94,571 cells). The first panel is colored by cell type based on FACS sorting, the second panel is colored by cluster-agnostic cell type according to Garnett classification and the third panel is colored by the Garnett cluster-extended type, which labels cells based on the composition of their cluster or community. 

--> Very nice. CD8 x CD4 expression difference seems to not be necessarily the major transcriptomic divide, by looking at the clusters when contrasting clustering agnostic and clustering aware. 

Finally,  annotation  labels are typically ad hoc; although ontologies of cell types exist5,6, we lack tools for systematically applying these ontologies to scRNA-seq data. Collectively, these challenges hinder progress toward a con-sensus framework for cell types and the features that define them.

Garnett  consists  of  four  components.  
First,  Garnett  defines  a  markup  language  for  specifying cell types using the genes that they specifically express.
The  markup  language  is  hierarchical  in  that  a  cell  type  can  have  subtypes  (for  example,  CD4+  and  CD8+  are  subsets  of  T  cells).
Second,  Garnett  includes  a  parser  that  processes  the  markup  file  together  with  a  single-cell  dataset,  identifying  representative  cells  bearing  markers  that  unambiguously  identify  them  as  one  of  the  cell types defined in the file.
Third, Garnett trains a classifier that recognizes additional cells as belonging to each cell type based on their  similarity  to  representative  cells,

--> Cool, I like that.

Garnett  requires ≥1 marker gene for each cell type. To classify the PBMCs, we populated a marker file including each of the expected cell types using  literature-based  markers.

We defined a single hierarchy of expected lung cell types based on those studies  and  compiled  marker  genes  from  literature  to  recognize  them in each dataset (marker files are Supplementary Files, consen-sus  cell  type  names  in  Supplementary  Table  1)
--> Nice; 3.1. Cell-type markers in Wikidata

We  next  applied  Garnett  to  the  task  of  discriminating  all  cell  types  of  a  whole  animal,  L2  stage  Caenorhabditis  elegans11.  We  defined  a  cell  hierarchy  that  discriminated  29  major  cell  types,  as  well as subtypes of neuron, using the marker genes from the origi-nal study.

Finally,  as  tissue-specific  gene  expression  patterns  are  largely  conserved   across   vertebrates13,   we   wondered   whether   Garnett   models  trained  on  mouse  data  could  be  used  to  classify  human  cell types

--> Cool, operating at the archetype level.

Cell type annotation is a critical and rate-limiting step in cell type atlas  construction,  as  illustrated  by  recent  studies  that  resorted  to  labor-intensive, ad hoc literature review to achieve this end2,3,7,11,12,15. Garnett is an algorithm and accompanying software that automates and  standardizes  the  process  of  classifying  cells  based  on  marker  genes.  


We anticipate the potential for an ‘ecosystem’ of Garnett marker files and pre-trained classifiers that: (1) enable the rapid, automated, reproducible annotation of cell types in any newly generated data-set, (2) minimize redundancy of effort, by allowing for marker gene hierarchies to be easily described, compared and evaluated and (3) facilitate  a  systematic  framework  and  shared  language  for  specify-ing, organizing and reaching consensus on a catalog of molecularly defined cell types. 


# Comments
That is my preferred method from now on. 
The vignette is top gold: https://cole-trapnell-lab.github.io/garnett/docs/#installing-garnett

Markers will definitely go to Wikidata
## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q90003307)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q90003307)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q90003307/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q90003307&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q90003307/P921%3BP4510)  
