
Single-cell RNA-seq analysis reveals the progression of human osteoarthritis
============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q90348985]  
  
Publication date : 19 of July, 2018  

# Highlights

treating osteoarthritis (oA). Here, we report the molecular programmes and lineage progression patterns controlling human oA pathogenesis using single-cell rnA sequencing (scrnA-seq).MethodsWe performed unbiased transcriptome-wide scrnA-seq analysis, computational analysis and histological assays on 1464 chondrocytes from 10 patients with oA undergoing knee arthroplasty surgery. We investigated the relationship between transcriptional programmes of the oA landscape and clinical outcome using severity index and correspondence analysis.


. We found a potential transition among proliferative chondrocytes, prehypertrophic chondrocytes and hypertrophic chondrocytes (HtCs) and defined a new subdivision within HtCs.

. We revealed novel markers for cartilage progenitor cells (CpCs) and demonstrated a relationship between CpCs and fibrocartilage chondrocytes using computational analysis. notably, we derived predictive targets with respect to clinical outcomes and clarified the role of different cell types for the early diagnosis and treatment of oA.


Studies   have shown that the chondrocyte subtypes in artic-ular  cartilage  include  proliferative  chondrocytes  (ProCs), prehypertrophic chondrocytes (preHTCs) and    hypertrophic    chondrocytes    (HTCs).

.  Recently,  senescent cells (SNCs) and cartilage progenitor cells (CPCs)  were  identified

owever,  because  of  their  phenotypic  heterogeneity  and  the  limited  number  of available markers to identify, isolate and manipu-late these cells, how to define the types of articular cartilage  chondrocytes  in  human  OA  has  still  not  been fully determined. These unknown parameters affect the ontogeny and function of each chondro-cyte population in OA pathogenesis.

 In total, we sequenced 1600 indi-vidual chondrocytes and retained 1464 chondrocytes for subse-quent  analysis  after  rigorous  filtration  (online  supplementary  figureS2A–C and supplementary table S2).

 We  also  performed  an  adjacency  network  analysis  and  iden-tified  the  relationships  among  the  OA  chondrocytes  on  the  basis  of  the  pairwise  correlation  between  cells,  and  the  results  were  consistent  with  the  PCA  results  for  PC2  presented  above  (figure1C,D and onlinesupplementary figureS2F).


resulting in a total of seven putative cell clusters (figure2A, onlinesupple-mentary figure S3A,B), including four empirically defined popu-lations:  ProCs,  preHTCs,  HTCs,  fibrocartilage  chondrocytes  (FCs) and three novel populations, named as following: effector chondrocytes   (ECs),   regulatory   chondrocytes   (RegCs)   and   homeostatic  chondrocytes  (HomCs)

Two OA chondrocyte clusters, ECs and RegCs, represent newly defined  populations  that  decrease  in  abundance  during  OA  progression (figure2A,C). 

As  HTCs  were  distributed  with  specific  discriminative  markers  across two subpopulations (figure2E), we next classified HTCs into  transcriptionally  distinct  clusters,  HTC-A  and  HTC-B

To further evaluate  the  diagnostic  value  of  the  candidate  biomarkers,  we  performed  receiver-operating  characteristic  (ROC)  curve  anal-ysis in a prospective cohort of 16 health controls and 21 patients with OA. ROC curve analysis indicated that four genes (ADRM1, HSPA2, RPS29 and COL5A1) could serve as valuable biomarkers, with the area under curve being 0.878, 0.896, 0.899 and 0.936, respectively (figure6G)

. Here, we investigated OA chondrocytes at different stages at single-cell resolution using comprehensive gene  expression  profiling.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q90348985)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q90348985)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q90348985/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q90348985&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/ANNRHEUMDIS-2017-212863)  
