
Text mining meets community curation: a newly designed curation platform to improve author experience and participation at WormBase
===================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q90415774]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2020  

# Highlights

WB engages its community, via an Author First Pass (AFP) system, to help recognize entities and classify data types in their recently published papers. In this paper, we present a new WB AFP system that combines TM and AFP into a single application to enhance community curation

ur approach is generalizable and could be applied to additional knowledgebases that would like to engage their user community in assisting with the curation. In the five months succeeding the launch of the new system, the response rate has been comparable with that of the previous AFP version, but the quality and quantity of the data received has greatly improved.

To date, two main approaches to reducing the biocuration backlog have been used by biological knowledgebases. First, in ‘community curation’, authors are engaged to curate at least some of the data in their papers using web interfaces designed to facilitate data entry. Some of these efforts have been summarized in the work of Karp et al. (3) and to some extent have proven successful. Second, text mining (TM) approaches are used to extract entities, classify the types of data described in papers (4) and extract simple facts for curation (e.g. a mutation in gene A suppresses a mutation in gene B) (5–8).

An example of a successful community curation system is that used by FlyBase (https://flybase.org/). Since 2012, FlyBase, the reference database for Drosophila melanogaster biology (10), has transitioned the initial triaging of papers to authors via a ‘Fast-Track Your Paper’ system (11).

An automated script performs daily searches on PubMed looking for new papers containing the keyword ‘elegans’ in the title or abstract and previously published papers indexed with the MeSH term ‘Caenorhabditis elegans’


The three components are included in a single open source repository available on GitHub at https://github.com/WormBase/author-first-pass.

Examples of non-relevant species mentions include anti-mouse or anti-rabbit antibodies in the Materials and Methods.

We also noted that many authors tend to submit data shortly after they receive the reminders.

The form allows the authors to submit new entities, i.e. alleles, strains, transgenes and antibodies, that are not yet present in the WB database. The average number of entities manually submitted by the authors per paper is shown in Table 6.

# Comments

## Tags

3.2.2. Community curation and gamified science

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q90415774)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q90415774)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q90415774/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q90415774&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q90415774/P921%3BP4510)  
