
The human body at cellular resolution: the NIH Human Biomolecular Atlas Program
===============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q90617765]  

# Highlights


NIH Common Fund Human Biomolecular Atlas Program (HuBMAP) intends to develop a widely accessible framework for comprehensively mapping the human body at single- cell resolution by supporting technology development, data acquisition, and detailed spatial mapping.

Three-dimensional organization of different cell types, together with the effects of cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions in their natural milieu, have a profound impact on normal function, natural ageing, tissue remodelling, and disease progression in different tissues and organs.

 three components: 
 (1) tissue mapping centres (TMCs); 
 (2) HuBMAP integration, visualization and engagement (HIVE) collaborative components; and
 (3) innovative technologies groups (transformative technology development (TTD) and rapid technology implementation (RTI))

 analyse a broad range of largely normal tissues, representing both sexes, different ethnicities and a variety of ages across the adult lifespan

--> adult lifespan!

The molecular state of each cell will be revealed by single-cell transcriptomic11 and, in many cases, chromatin accessibility12,13 assays.

imputation of transcription factor binding regions from the open chromatin data combined with the gene expression data will be used to explain the regulation of gene expression across the distinct cell types.

Open source portals will use recognized standards and be interoperable with other platforms, such as the HCA Data Coordination Platform, making it possible to readily add, update, and use new software modules.

HuBMAP envisions a strategy inspired by other tissue atlas efforts36–38 that leverages the identifica- tion of ‘landmark’ features, including key anatomical structures and canonical components of tissue organization (for example, epidermal boundaries and normally spatially invariant vasculature) that can be identified in all individuals.

Determining the number of cells, fields of view, and samples needed to capture rare cell types, states or tissue structures is an important challenge.

Ultimately, we hope to catalyse novel views on the organization of tissues, regarding not only which types of cells are neighbouring one another, but also the gene and protein expression patterns that define these cells, their phenotypes, and functional interactions.

These data have the potential to redefine types or subtypes of cells and their relationships within and between tissues beyond the traditional under- standing that can be obtained through standard methods (for example, microscopy and flow cytometry).



# Comments
https://commonfund.nih.gov/hubmap

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q90617765)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q90617765)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q90617765/P921%3BP4510)  
