
The Reactome pathway knowledgebase
==================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91135284]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2020  

# Highlights

To extend our ability to annotate human disease processes, we have implemented a new drug class and have used it initially to annotate drugs relevant to cardiovascular disease. Our annotation model depends on external domain experts to identify new areas for annotation and to review new content. New web pages facilitate recruitment of community experts and allow those who have contributed to Reactome to identify their contributions and link them to their ORCID records.

The Reactome Knowledgebase is distinctive in focusing its manual annotation effort on a single species, Homo sapiens, and applying a single consistent data model across all domains of biology

 These reactions are grouped into 1803 pathways (e.g. interleukin-15 signaling, phosphatidylinositol phosphate metabolism and receptor-mediated mitophagy) grouped into 26 superpathways (e.g. immune system, metabolism and autophagy).

 Notable recent additions include extended annotations of SUMOylation and NEDDylation reactions and their regulatory consequences, annotations of NOTCH and RUNX signaling processes

 A new ‘drug’ class of physical entities in our data model distinguishes chemical drugs (e.g. β-blockers) from protein drugs (e.g. therapeutic antibodies) and RNA drugs (e.g. synthetic small RNAs).

 Community participation is enabled by a web page (Figure 2) that lists all newly created events that are ready for final review, with an on-line form that allows a person to identify an event of interest and volunteer to work with us on it. The page also can be used to propose new topics for annotation.

 To associate a person’s ORCID identifier with events on which the person has worked, the Reactome search engine has been modified so that a search on the person’s name now returns a web page that lists all events (reactions and pathways) to which the named person has contributed as an author or reviewer (Figure 3)

 As a result, colorizing the ‘fireworks’ view to display an overview of the results, e.g., of overlaying a gene expression dataset on the Reactome event hierarchy often yields results that are not readily viewed by a human user. To solve this display problem, we have developed an alternative display option based on Voronoi diagrams (Wikipedia. Voronoi diagram https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Voronoi_diagram&oldid=908392936 (accessed 26 August 2019)).
 The resulting pathway display (Figure 5B) is partitioned into contiguous regions, each corresponding to a pathway and grouped according to the relationships among pathways specified in the event hierarchy

 --> Cool

 We are grateful to the more than 800 expert scientists who have collaborated with us as external authors and reviewers of Reactome content since 2002
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91135284)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91135284)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91135284/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91135284&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/NAR/GKZ1031)  
