
GeneDB and Wikidata
===================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91273803]  

# Highlights

Here, we show how importing GeneDB annotation data into Wikidata allows for leveraging existing resources, integrating volunteer and scientific communities, and enriching the original information.

The GeneDB website has presented genome annotation data from eukaryotic and prokaryotic pathogens1 sequenced by the Wellcome Sanger Institute for more than 15 years.

We also describe utilising the Wikidata APIs to create a new version of the GeneDB website with content created solely based on Wikidata items.

GeneDB exports its Chado database monthly.
These files are parsed to create or update Wikidata items, for both genes and their protein products.
This includes the addition of GO terms, as well as the creation and usage of Wikidata items about the scientific publications containing the respective findings.

Individual edits that are both relevant to GeneDB, and not done by a Wikidata user on a “whitelist” of known, trusted users are summarized daily by an automated script, and sent to the GeneDB ticketing system for manual inspection. 
Nhese changes are either ignored, reverted on Wikidata (e.g., vandal- ism), or imported into the GeneDB Chado database.The volume of such edits is quite low (~1/week) at this time, though we expect this to pick up with more members of the scientific community becoming aware of this venue into Wikidata.


--> Nice way to integrate!

The code to import and update Wikidata items was written in Rust10
(rustc 1.36.0), using (amongst others) the rust-bio crate11
for GFF and GAF reading

At this time (26/07/2019), 409,219 Wikidata items for genes (including 9,031 pseudogenes), and an additional 397,979 items for proteins, have been created (http://tinyurl.com/y6wpfyrn), covering 45 taxa

f Wikidata contains items about publications that have the gene or protein as a “main subject”, these publications are listed at the bottom of the page. This is an example of additional, on-topic information that Wikidata provides on top of the GeneDB dataset.

The GeneDB search function utilizes Wikidata search, letting users find genes by name, alias, ID, and related information, across all covered species. The search will only return genes on Wikidata with a GeneDB identifier.

The simplified maintenance of the HTML/JS-only GeneDB website, com- pared to a previous one that combined a frontend and back- end solution, frees technical and personnel resources.

Publishing on Wikidata also exposes the data in new ways and potentially engages with a broader public audience.



# Tags:
- 1.3.3.1 Life sciences projects that use Wikidata

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91273803)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91273803)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91273803/P921%3BP4510)  
