
scMatch: a single-cell gene expression profile annotation tool using reference datasets
=======================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91557912]  
  
Publication date : 01 of November, 2019  

# Highlights

We introduce scMatch, which directly annotates single cells by identifying their closest
match in large reference datasets. We used this strategy to annotate various single-cell datasets
and evaluated the impacts of sequencing depth, similarity metric and reference datasets.

We found
that scMatch can rapidly and robustly annotate single cells with comparable accuracy to another
recent cell annotation tool (SingleR),

 In top-match mode, a cell is simply
annotated based on the best correlated sample within the reference
database (Fig. 1, Step 2A). Alternatively, ontology-mode uses sample ontology terms (such as the cell ontology; Diehl et al., 2016) to
group samples from the same cell type or lineage and then calculates
the average correlation (Fig. 1, Step 2B). The ontology term with the
highest average correlation is then used to annotate the cell. 

--> Nice that they acknowledge ontologies! Relevant for  1.3.4. Cell Ontology (and CELDA)

Step 2(B). ontology-mode,
use the cell ontology term
with the best average correlation
to annotate the single cell
CL: XXXX

--> This is super cool, but definitely imprecise ontologically. Definitions on CL are used as descriptions.

Highly expressed and lineage-specific genes were extracted from
the FANTOM5 expression atlas.

Reference gene expression data were collected from FANTOM5,
SingleR’s Github repository (https://github.com/dviraran/SingleR)
and UCSC Xena Cancer browser (https://xenabrowser.net). 

scMatch is written in Python

As expected, cells with more reads were more likely to be correctly classified than those down-sampled to lower read depths
In particular CD4þ helper T cells, CD4þ/CD45RAþ/CD25 Naı¨ve T cells and
CD4þ/CD25þ Regulatory T cells had recalls above 50% using either all genes or highly expressed genes. In contrast CD56þ NK cells and CD4þ/CD45ROþ Memory T cells had poor recall regardless of
the correlation method or the gene sets used.


Next we evaluated the use of the ‘ontology-mode’ (using
Spearman’s correlations on all genes, Fig. 1) to annotate this dataset.
To do this we used the cell ontology (CL) annotations provided in
the FANTOM5 atlas. For each single cell, correlations against reference samples in FANTOM5 with the same cell ontology annotation
were averaged, and then cell ontology matches were sorted based on
the average correlation.

--> Nice!! 

for multiple cell
types the annotation recalls improved in ontology-mode. E.g.
CD14þ monocytes achieved a recall of 78.8% in top-match mode
but 94.3% were annotated as CL: 0002397: CD14-positive, CD16-
positive monocyte in ontology mode

--> Nicer! Relevant also for 2.4.2.2.2


Most contemporary approaches employ unsupervised clustering of
cell expression profiles, followed by manual annotation of each cluster’s identity based on gene expression markers (Kim et al., 2018;Svensson et al., 2017). However, the unsupervised clustering algorithms are known to yield inconsistent results (Freytag et al., 2018).

--> 1.4.2.3. Cell label identification

 SingleR calculates correlations only using the
variable genes in the reference dataset. By combining samples from
multiple reference datasets the set of variable genes identified by
SingleR may change and thus affect the annotations. I


Currently we are unable to provide a meaningful confidence measure for annotations reported by scMatch. Cell types not present in the reference dataset will still be annotated with their closest match
and closely related subtypes (e.g. T cells) may be difficult to
discriminate.

--> Very good statement of limitations. 

In conclusion, with the availability of large numbers of single
cell datasets over the coming years, driven by the Human Cell Atlas
(Regev et al., 2018) and others (Han et al., 2018; Tabula Muris
et al., 2018), scalable methods such as scMatch are needed for cell
classification. Conversely, the cell types identified and their expression profiles in these atlases can be fed in as reference datasets to improve the annotation of future experiments.

--> This is good, but might lead to compounding errors.

# Comments

## Tags
1.4.2.3. Cell label identification         
1.4.2.3.2. Labelling events
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91557912)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91557912)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91557912/P921%3BP4510)  
