
PubMed Text Similarity Model and its application to curation efforts in the Conserved Domain Database
=====================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91566046]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2019  

# Highlights

This study proposes a text similarity model to help biocuration efforts of the Conserved Domain Database (CDD). CDD is a curated resource that catalogs annotated multiple sequence alignment models for ancient domains and full-length proteins.

Through this exercise, we discovered that we were able to map the articles in the reference list to the CDD description statements with an accuracy of 77%

This corpus contains 5159 sentence pairs judged for their similarity on a scale from 1 (low) to 5 (high) doubly annotated by four CDD curators. Curator-assigned similarity scores have a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.70 and an inter-annotator agreement of 85%. To date, this is the largest biomedical text similarity resource that has been manually judged, evaluated and made publicly available to the community to foster research and development of text similarity algorithms.

In this manuscript, we first give an overview of the CDD database of curated protein domains, and we discuss text similarity research, its applications and related work.


The current live CDD version, v3.16, contains 56 066 protein models and protein domain models, with content obtained from Pfam (8), SMART (9), the COGs collection (10), TIGRFAMS (11), the NCBI Protein Clusters collection (12) and NCBI’s in-house data curation effort (7).

Our general interest is in finding sentences closely related to a sentence provided by a user as a query to a large repository of sentences. One approach to this problem would be to ask for sentences that have the same meaning as the query text. This is known as semantic textual similarity (25, 26). 


Why should we think the alpha weight is a useful weight for retrieval of sentences? Our examination of a good deal of data computed in this way has convinced us that the most semantically meaningful terms receive the highest alpha weights.

In May 2018, we retrieved 12 774 conserved domain description summaries written by NCBI curators since 1999. 
For those PubMed articles where we were able to access the full text (32%), we used the full text; for the rest we used their PubMed title and abstract.

To evaluate the quality of the dataset, we calculated the Pearson correlation coefficient for the reference prediction set and for the Discovery prediction set and found the values 0.678 and 0.775, respectively.

o this end, the CDD text similarity corpus is an important contribution to the community and, as far as we are aware, the largest manually judged dataset of sentence pairs in the biomedical domain.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91566046)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91566046)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91566046/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91566046&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/DATABASE/BAZ064)  
