
Identification of a mesenchymal progenitor cell hierarchy in adipose tissue
===========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91523279]  
  
Publication date : 01 of April, 2019  

# Highlights

 They found that progenitor cells expressing a protein called DPP4 give rise to two distinct types of preadipocytes in response to different signals. The DPP4 progenitors reside in a fluid-filled network of collagen and elastin fibers surrounding adipose tissue.

Intercellular adhesion molecule–1–expressing (ICAM1+) cells are committed preadipocytes that express Pparg and are poised to differentiate into mature adipocytes with minimal stimulation.

. DPP4+ cells depend on transforming growth factor–β (TGFβ) signaling to maintain their progenitor identity, whereas ICAM1+ preadipocytes are refractory to the proliferative and anti-adipogenic actions of the TGFβ pathway. Obesity and insulin resistance lead to a depletion of DPP4+ mesenchymal progenitors and a reduction in the adipogenic differentiation competency of preadipocytes

The DPP4+ progenitor cells are localized in an anatomically distinct niche surrounding the adipose depot, which we term the reticular interstitium.

DPP4+ progenitors reside in the reticular interstitium and give rise to committed preadipocytes.
DPP4+ multipotent progenitor cells give rise to ICAM1+ and CD142+ committed preadipocytes, which are poised to differentiate into mature adipocytes (top)

We applied single-cell RNA sequencing (RNA-
seq) to identify and profile progenitor cells in
an unbiased manner from the developing sub-
cutaneous inguinal WAT (iWAT) of 12-day-old
(p12) mice.

CAM1+ and CD142+ cells
differentiated efficiently into adipocytes (a result
similar to that seen with the complete cocktail)
whereas DPP4+ cells displayed very low adipo-
genic capacity (Fig. 2B). ICAM1+ and CD142+
cells expressed adipocyte-specific genes at or
near the levels observed in primary adipocytes
isolated from adipose tissue, whereas DPP4+
cultures displayed little to no induction of these
genes (Fig. 2C).

TGFbsignaling maintains DPP4+
progenitor cell identity

To address this, we used FACS to iden-
tify and purify DPP4+, ICAM1+, and CD142+ cells
from fresh subcutaneous adipose tissue of human
subjects undergoing cosmetic plastic surgery
(Fig. 4A). Human adipose tissue contained pro-
portionally fewer DPP4+ cells than mouse adi-
pose tissue (Fig. 4B). Human DPP4+ cells, like their
mouse counterparts, displayed higher proliferative
activity (Fig. 4C) and lower potential to differen-
tiate into adipocytes than both ICAM1+ and
CD142+ cells, especially under conditions of min-
imal adipogenic stimulation (Fig. 4, D and E).


To investigate the heterogeneity of human
adipose stromal cells in an unbiased manner,
we performed single-cell expression profiling of
CD45-depleted SVCs from human abdominal
subcutaneous WAT. 

Burl et al. performed single -cell RNA-seq on
SVCs from adult mouse iWAT and eWAT and
identified populations similar to those we found
in p12 pups (28). Specifically, the group-defining
genes for ASC2 (DPP4+/Pi16+) cells overlap exten-
sively with the genes defining our group 1 (DPP4+)
population, and the ASC1 (ICAM1+/Col4a2+)
group is similar to our group 2 (ICAM1+) cells
(fig. S19). Hepler et al. defined two main subtypes
of Pdgfrb-expressing (mural) cells in murine eWAT:
fibroinflammatory precursors (FIPs),

In conclusion, we define a developmental hi-
erarchy of adipose progenitors that are active
during early murine adipogenesis, and we sug-
gest that this may be a general paradigm for
adipogenesis in both mice and humans. In young
animals, DPP4+ interstitial progenitors produce
CD142+ cells and ICAM1+ preadipocytes that are
poised to differentiate into adipocytes (Fig. 6B).
We speculate that, in adults, DPP4+ cells under-
go adipose lineage commitment in response to
various stimuli, providing a renewable source of
preadipocytes.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91523279)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91523279)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91523279/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91523279&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.AAV2501)  
