
Reporting and connecting cell type names and gating definitions through ontologies
==================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91614095]  

# Highlights
Human immunology studies often rely on the isolation and quantification of cell populations from an input sample based on flow cytometry and related techniques. Such techniques classify cells into populations based on the detection of a pattern of markers. The description of the cell populations targeted in such experiments typically have two complementary components: the description of the cell type targeted (e.g. ‘T cells’), and the description of the marker pattern utilized (e.g. CD14−,CD3+).

We here describe our attempts to use ontologies to cross-compare cell types and marker patterns (also referred to as gating definitions). 

We used a large set of such gating definitions and corresponding cell types submitted by different investigators into ImmPort, a central database for immunology studies, to examine the ability to parse gating definitions using terms from the Protein Ontology (PRO) and cell type descriptions, using the Cell Ontology (CL). We then used logical axioms from CL to detect discrepancies between the two.

We also suggest a number of new terms to describe gating definitions in flow cytometry that are not based on molecular markers captured in PRO, but on forward- and side-scatter of light during data acquisition, which is more appropriate to capture in the Ontology for Biomedical Investigations (OBI). Finally, our approach results in suggestions on what logical axioms and new cell types could be considered for addition to the Cell Ontology.

We describe here our attempts to standardize the “cell population” field, by mapping it to terms in the Cell Ontology

As a result of this work, we propose a new convention on how these two fields should be populated that allows one to interpret them computationally, query across them, and to utilize logical axioms in the Cell Ontology to check for consistency between them. “singlet/ CD14−/CD3+” is a gating definition from a center using slashes as separators which consists of three gates: “singlet”, “CD14−”, and “CD3+”. 

Our purposes to recognize PRO as the central arbiter and translator of protein names.

While the synonyms in Table 1 were considered not problematic, we also found a number of labels that could not be mapped precisely to individual proteins in PRO. A common case were protein complexes: Investigators often refer to “CD8”, which is a complex of a CD8 alpha

--> Maybe biomedical research is not coherent, and logical definitions migh need to
    include a degree of uncertainty.

Ideally, all of these protein complexes would be included in PRO. This work should be coordinated with the Cell Ontology, to ensure it matches the logical cell type definitions. The use of cocktails of markers to include or exclude lineages of cells (e.g. ‘Lin-’) is hard to represent as different cocktails exist.

Several gating definitions we encountered for flow cytometry data do not refer to a specific marker, but rather utilize forward- and side-scatter of detector light to provide size estimates of the object passing by the detector.

Such definitions of cell types based on their characteristics in a flow cytometer are best captured in the Ontology of Biomedical Investigations (OBI), and we are in the process of submitting them there.

The guideline to use CL terms for submission of cell populations to ImmPort was found to be insufficient, as most cell populations gated for are further subsets or activation states of CL types.

Thus, we revised our approach and developed a future tentative guideline whereby the data provider specifies the parent cell type in CL and adds additional markers or cell subtypes after an ‘&’ symbol. For example, “BDCA3_pmDC” was parsed to ‘plasmacytoid dendritic cell’ & “BDCA3+”.

In order to detect such discrepancies, we implemented a prototype validator, shown in Fig. 1, which can be accessed through https://github.com/jamesaoverton/cell- name-and-marker-validator. The proposed workflow is that users would input “Population name” and “Gating definitions” fields and the validator will check both for
validity and cross-check for consistency.

We then wrote a second Python program to demonstrate our vision of the standard terminology going forward as an interactive web page. This tool reads labels and logical definitions from the Cell Ontology, PRO short labels from the Protein Ontology, and our manual list of gate names. The user is asked to enter a cell population name from the Cell Ontology and a set of gates. The tool then displays the logical definition for the cell type and the gating strategy, and highlights any conflicts between the two..

Here we demonstrated that a vast number of gating definitions, but not cell population names, could be mapped to terms in ontologies, allowing us to semantically ex- press them and detect potential clashes.

Some gate names occurred nearly 2000 times, while others only occurred once

The relationships between “Population name” and “Gating definition” are not absolute, for example if the input sample type is PBMC versus splenocytes (“Population name”) with the same sorting definition (“Gating definition”) the outcome will be different cell types. This means that the validation cannot be expected to catch every potential error and fu- ture refinement may be possible after larger datasets are generated using these criteria. We also recognize that our approach is human-centric.

Lastly, and significantly, implementation of this validation into the ImmPort submission templates is required if it is to be practical and easy for the HIPC community to utilize.

# Comments

Seems that they a aim at a very advanced very level of usage before we lay a bit more of the foundations. 

Manual curation will not happen for all proteins of all organisms. 

https://github.com/jamesaoverton/experimental-cell-ontology



# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91614095)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91614095)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91614095/P921%3BP4510)  
