
Defining the Design Principles of Skin Epidermis Postnatal Growth
=================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91662287]  
  
Publication date : 05 of April, 2020  

# Highlights

During postnatal growth, tissues steadily
grow until they achieve their final size.
Looking at the interfollicular epidermis in
mice, Dekoninck et al. find that
progenitors present an excess of selfrenewing division throughout the
development.

Single-cell RNA sequencing revealed that epidermal developmental progenitors form a more uniform
population compared with adult stem and progenitor cells.

The skin is the first barrier that protects animals against their
microenvironment. The epidermis is composed of hair follicles
(HFs) and their surrounding interfollicular epidermis (IFE).

 We performed unsupervised clustering
and excluded the cell clusters of the infundibulum (Sox9high,
Krt17high, and Krt79high), sebaceous gland cells (Scd1high,
Mgst1high, and Elovl6high), as well as cells containing a high content of mitochondrial genes, such as mt-Co1 (dying cells) and
performed further bioinformatics analysis on IFE cells 

To define when this cellular heterogeneity emerges, we performed single-cell RNA sequencing on the tail epidermis of a
young adult mouse, at P30, when the clonal dynamics change
from growth to homeostasis

In this study, we unraveled the clonal dynamics and the underlying mechanisms that mediate postnatal skin expansion using
mouse tails and paw epidermis as models

Our mathematical model reveals a surprising
simplicity in the process of epidermal expansion. In particular,
we find that quasi-linear epidermis growth is blueprinted via a
combination of (1) a steadily decreasing cell division rate over
time and

Further
experiments will be necessary to understand whether and
how such feedback (tissue size, local density, thickness,
division rate, and/or imbalance) is implemented mechanistically.



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91662287)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91662287)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91662287&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2020.03.015)  
