
Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of Alzheimer's disease
==========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91668217]  
  
Publication date : 01 of May, 2019  

# Highlights

 Across six major brain cell types, we identified transcriptionally distinct subpopulations, including those associated with pathology and characterized by regulators of myelination, inflammation, and neuron survival

 Post-mortem human brain samples came from 48 participants in the Religious Order Study (ROS) or the Rush Memory and Aging Project (MAP),

For each individual, we profiled tissue from the prefrontal cortex (Brodmann area 10)


We report a total of 80,660 droplet-based single-nucleus RNA-seq (snRNA-seq) profiles (Extended Data Fig. 2a), which are publicly available on the ROSMAP data compendium (see ‘Data availability’).

We identified and annotated the major cell types of the human brain by interrogating the expression patterns of known marker genes18,21: excitatory neurons (marked by NRGN), inhibitory neurons (GAD1), astrocytes (AQP4), oligodendrocytes (MBP), microglia (CSF1R and CD74), oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (VCAN), endothelial cells (FLT1), and pericytes (AMBP)

We  compared  levels  of  gene  expression  in  cells  isolated  from  AD-pathology versus no-pathology individuals by cell type.

he vast majority of DEGs (95%) were perturbed only in neurons or in a single glial cell type, which indicates that these perturbations are strongly cell-type specific (Fig. 1h).

For each individual, we first computed the correlation between the expression profile of each gene (for a given cell type) and a pathological trait. We then analysed the resultant gene–trait correlation patterns using the self-organizing map (SOM) approach3

We identified robust differences in the association of AD pathol-ogy between cells from female versus male individuals (Fig. 3d)—AD-pathology-associated cell subpopulations (Ex4, Ast1, Oli0, and Mic1) were enriched with female cells, whereas no-pathology subpop-ulations (Ex6, Ast0, and Oli1) were enriched with male cells.
Notably, we found con-trasting, qualitatively distinct responses between sexes, involving multiple cell types (Supplementary Table 8). The most extreme differences were observed in neurons and oligodendrocytes.

Overall, our single-cell-resolution analysis highlights the complexity of glial–neuronal interactions in response to AD pathology.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91668217)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91668217)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91668217/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91668217&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-019-1195-2)  
