
Improving reference prioritisation with PICO recognition
========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91728644]  
  
Publication date : 05 of December, 2019  

# Highlights

Machine learning can assist with multiple tasks during systematic reviews to facilitate the rapid
retrieval of relevant references during screening and to identify and extract information relevant to the study
characteristics, which include the PICO elements of patient/population, intervention, comparator, and outcomes. The
latter requires techniques for identifying and categorising fragments of text, known as named entity recognition.

Words within PICO tagged segments in abstracts are predictive features for determining inclusion.
Combining PICO annotation model into the relevancy classification pipeline is a promising approach. The annotations
may be useful on their own to aid users in pinpointing necessary information for data extraction, or to facilitate
semantic search.

While previous studies [7, 16, 17] have shown the potential for time-savings, the underlying models treat each
word equally and do not explicitly distinguish PICO elements within an abstract. As PICO elements are crucial for a human reviewer to making inclusion decisions or design screening filters [18], we hypothesise
that a ML model with information on each reference’s
PICO would outperform a similar model lacking this
information.

Rather than extract specific text, Singh et al. predict
which medical concepts in the unified medical language
system (UMLS) [66] are described in the full-text for each
PICO element [67]. They use a neural network model that
exploits embeddings of UMLS concepts in addition to
word embeddings. The predicted concepts could be used
as alternative features rather than just the extracted text.
This would supplement manually added metadata such
as Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) curated by the U.S.
National Library of Medicine [68], which are not always
available or have the necessary categorisations.

The results indicate that the additional PICO tagging is
useful for improving machine learning performanc. Furthermore, PICO tagging is an interpretable process
meant to emulate human annotation and can readily be
used by reviewers themselves

# Comments

## Tags
1.1.1. Literature Based Discovery, hidden knowledge and text-mining


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91728644)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91728644)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91728644/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Improving%20reference%20prioritisation%20with%20PICO%20recognition'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
