
SBOL-OWL: An Ontological Approach for Formal and Semantic Representation of Synthetic Biology Information
=========================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91791013]  
  
Publication date : 14 of May, 2019  

# Highlights

he Synthetic Biology Open Language(SBOL) has already emerged as a data standard to represent informationabout genetic circuits, and it is based on capturing data using graphs. Thelanguage provides the syntax using a free text document that is accessible tohumans only. This paper describes SBOL-OWL, an ontology for a machineunderstandable definition of SBOL. 

SBOL-OWL not only describes how genetic circuits can be constructedcomputationally, it also facilitates the use of several existing Semantic Web tools for synthetic biology.

It is crucial thatdesigns are unambiguously represented and sufficientinformation is provided for the sake of reproducibility.4,5This process requires not only capturing data using a commonsyntax but also agreeing on semantics for machine interoper-ability. The use of computationally tractable representations ofdesigns, for instanceviathe GenBank format,6often omitessential information about the descriptions of gene products,such as molecular interactions and hierarchical structure.

As of this writing,the specification is 132 pages (Version 2.2.1), and growsincrementally between different versions.

Currently, rules to validate SBOL documents are written in afree-text specification. These rules are interpreted by softwaredevelopers, and programmatic validation strategies are applied.Libraries have already been developed for reading and writingSBOL entities in Java,14C, Python,15and JavaScript1

 The SynBioHub18,19design repository, for example,is based on an RDF triplestore, and, hence, standardSPARQL20graph queries are used to extract designinformation

 --> Nice!

enting Relationships between Design Compo-nents.One of the reasons to develop SBOL-OWL is tovalidate SBOL documents using an ontological approach,where logical axioms are used to confirm that the ontology isconsistent when it is merged with SBOL documents. Thissemantic layer provided by the ontology helps identifyinginconsistencies through existing reasoner

Not everything that is necessary todefine genetic circuits exists in other ontologies. Therefore, theSBOL standard has been extended with specific terms wherenecessary.

Figure 4.SBOL terms specific to the serialization of genetic circuitdesigns are described as OWL classe

--> Nice


In SBOL-OWL, as in OWL more generally, one queries thedata by creating a formal class definition, which then allowsstandard OWL inference engines28−30to determine member-ship into this class, thereby providing an answer to the query.For example, tofind all instances of promoters, one woulddefine the class Promoter exactly as inFigure 5B, and ask forall members (or instances) of this class

n contrast, graph-based SPARQL queries do not allow forrecursion, and thus could only retrieve such informationviamultiple programmatic calls.

(A) SBOL-OWL based query tofind the part that comes after the ptetR par

--> That is quite advanced.

Figure 11.“circuit_0x78_environment”genetic circuit design (adapted from ref39), with three environmental inputs and one output, is shownusing SBOL Visual glyphs40(http://sbolstandard.org/visual). 

--> These are super cool.

emanticSBOL.We developed the semanticSBOL libraryto facilitate the application of reasoners to SBOL graphs. Thelibrary includes methods to combine SBOL graphs with SBOL-OWL and the resulting graphs can directly be submitted toreasoners, either manually or programmaticall

 We used this approach for the“2018 iGEMDistribution Plate 1”collection, to verify that designsannotated to be specifically forBacillus subtilisdo not containanEscherichia colipromoter (Table 2, entry 14).

 --> Powerful

Representing genetic designs using RDF graphs alreadyexploits existing Semantic Web tools. Design information canbe stored in RDF databases, called triplestores, and standardRDF libraries can be used to execute graph queries. SBOL-OWL adds a semantic layer over these queries. SynBioHub18,19has previously successfully demonstrated the creation ofinstances of these triplestores.

SBOL has alreadyadopted the Provenance Ontology (PROV-O,https://www.w3.org/TR/prov-o/) to provide provenance information aboutdesigns. The SyBiOnt44has been developed as an applicationontology and is promising as a way of providing an integrationmechanism to different ontologies. The linking of SBOL-OWLand SyBiOnt can bridge the use of existing biological data anddesign information to create reliable biological applications.





# Comments

## Tags


3.9 Semantic Systems and Synthetic Biology

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91791013)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91791013)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91791013/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91791013&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91791013/P921%3BP4510)  
