
Massively multiplex chemical transcriptomics at single-cell resolution
======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91734742]  
  
Publication date : 05 of December, 2019  

# Highlights

Srivatsan et al. now add another layer of information and complexity by combining single-cell transcriptomics with oligo hashing and small molecule screening in a method called sci-Plex. B


Because screening many chemical compounds requires the ability to profile many cells, and because screens perturb cells in many different ways, the authors demonstrate the effects of 188 compounds in three cancer lines. 

 we applied sci-Plex to screen three cancer cell lines exposed to 188 compounds. In total, we profiled ~650,000 single-cell transcriptomes across ~5000 independent samples in one experiment.

develop a low-cost labeling procedure.
We noticed that single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) specifically
stained the nuclei of permeabilized cells, but not intact cells
(Fig. 1A and fig. S1A). We therefore postulated that a polyadenylated ssDNA oligonucleotide could be used to label populations of nuclei in a manner compatible with sci-RNA-seq
(Fig. 1B and fig. S1B).

We next evaluated whether nuclear hashing could enable
chemical screens, by labeling cells that had undergone a specific perturbation, followed by single-cell transcriptional profiling as a high-content phenotypic assay

Nuclei from each
well were labeled and subjected to sci-RNA-seq2 (fig. S2, B to
D, and table S1).

To assess how sci-Plex scales for HTS, we performed a screen
of 188 compounds targeting a diverse range of enzymes and
molecular pathways (Fig. 3A). Half of this panel was chosen
to target transcriptional and epigenetic regulators. The other
half was chosen to sample diverse mechanisms of action. We
exposed three well-characterized human cancer cell lines
(A549 (lung adenocarcinoma), K562 (chronic myelogenous
leukemia), MCF7 (mammary adenocarcinoma) to each of
these 188 compounds at four doses (10 nM, 100 nM, 1 μM, 10
μM) in duplicate, randomizing compounds and doses across
well positions in replicate culture plates (table S3).

--> Beautiful dataset by the way! So much can be done.

Such heterogeneity could be explained by cells executing
a defined transcriptional program asynchronously, with the
dose of drug that the cells are exposed to modulating the
rates of their progression through it.

--> RNA velocity would look well on that. 

). However, for the majority of
HDAC inhibitors tested, we did not observe that cells at a
given dose moved farther along an aligned HDAC trajectory
at 72 hours (fig. S26). This suggests that the dose of many
HDAC inhibitors governs the magnitude of a cell’s response
rather than its rate of progression and that any observed heterogeneity cannot be attributed solely to asynchrony (fig.
S26).

--> Neg result, cool.


As the cost of single cell sequencing continues to fall, the
opportunities for leveraging sci-Plex for basic and applied
goals in biomedicine may be substantial. The proof-of-concept experiments described here–nearly 5,000 independent
treatments, transcriptional profiling of over 100 single cells
per treatment–can potentially be scaled toward a comprehensive, high-resolution atlas of cellular responses to pharmacologic perturbations (e.g. hundreds of cell lines or genetic
backgrounds, thousands of compounds, multi-channel single
cell profiling, etc.). The ease and low cost of oligo hashing,
coupled with the flexibility and exponential scalability of single cell combinatorial indexing, would facilitate this goal

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91734742)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91734742)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91734742/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91734742&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.AAX6234)  
