
Structured reviews for data and knowledge-driven research
=========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91866899]  

# Highlights

Systematic review articles are commonly used in biomedicine to summarize existing knowledge and contextualize experimental data. But the information contained within review articles is typically only expressed as free-text, which is difficult to use computationally. Researchers struggle to navigate, collect and remix prior knowledge as it is scattered in several silos without seamless integration and access

To better organize knowledge and data, we built a structured review article that is specifically focused on NGLY1 Deficiency, an ultra- rare genetic disease first reported in 2012. We represented this structured review as a knowledge graph and then stored this knowledge graph in a Neo4j database to simplify dissemination, querying and visualization of the network.
http://ngly1graph.org/browser/

--> Nice.

While these meta-databases are valuable, their objective is typically different from the goals of a domain-specific review article, which usually focuses on a richly heterogeneous network of knowledge in a relatively limited scope of biology.

This work focuses on the complementary challenge of organizing a diverse and heterogeneous graph of knowl- edge relevant to a research question in a relatively defined domain area for hypothesis generation, and performing this integration in a way that is amenable to computational analysis. We call this type of effort a ‘structured review article’.

We also created a tool for community curation and contribution

We used Wikidata (http://wikidata.org/) to retrieve metadata for our biocurated network such as identifiers (IDs) from different vocabularies or entity cross- references, human readable labels, synonyms and descriptions. Wikidata is a project of the Wikimedia Foundation that enables the collaborative construction of a centralized graph database. Wikidata contains biomedical knowledge populated automatically from trusted authorities such as NCBI’s Entrez Gene, PubChem and the Human Disease Ontology (17). Using the Wikidata SPARQL API (http://query.wikidata.org), we retrieved data from the 201703 version.

For normalization of curated data to Monarch model we used the Wikidata SPARQL endpoint to retrieve cross-references to map entities.


The BioKnowledge Reviewer Library We created a library using the Python 3 programmatic language to reproduce the creation protocol of the struc- tured review in a workflow. Functionality was guided by knowledge and reasoning of NGLY1 researchers. Under the research question, experts formulated a priori the specific questions they wanted to explore in the graph. The library is designed to give flexibility on the construction of the review network by choosing, concatenating and merging topic- specific networks. It allows to build reviews in a modular way by steps in the workflow and by different topics. We adopted a modular approach for its management to facil- itate its reusability, update and consistency checking. The architecture of the system has four components (Figure 2). This programming library is versioned in GitHub to enable the community to add new functionality required to review new pieces of knowledge and apply it to answer more diverse types of questions. Availability at Library: https://github.com/SuLab/bioknowledge-reviewer Workflow notebook: https://github.com/SuLab/biokno
wledge-reviewer/blob/master/bioknowledge_reviewer/gra ph_v3.2_v20190616.ipynb


We used the Neo4j graph database framework for storage, management and mining of structured data. The graph database approach has been shown to facilitate manage- ment and exploration of biomedical knowledge (29). Neo4j enables users to query the graph using the Cypher query lan- guage, either through an API or a graphical user interface. All data were imported into the Neo4j Community Server v3.5.3.

Specifically, we sought to explain the phenotypic effects of aquaporins on cellular phenotypes of NGLY1 Deficiency. Researchers found a transcriptional regulation link between NGLY1, ENGASE and AQP1 (16). However, the mech- anism of this effect on a molecular level was not clear

Papers by Enns et al.in 2014 (35)and Lam et al. in 2017 (36) captured the known molecular biology involved in the disorder and the most recent and complete characteristics of the clinical pheno- typic spectrum. Based on these two papers, we added to our knowledge network 101 phenotypes linked toNGLY1 Defi- ciency and an additional 142 biological relationships join- ing genes, variants and functions.

To create and analyse the structured review, we created a Python library and a jupyter notebook based on the knowledge graph construction protocol described above. The library allows any researcher to automate and repro- duce the ingestion, integration of all data sources and the creation of the knowledge graph in bioinformatic workflows.

We stored the resulting graph in a Web-based application for dissemination, querying, visualization and curation. This application is a hybrid between two technologies— Neo4j and Wikibase—with complementary strengths: knowledge navigation and knowledge contribution.

The Wikibase software offers manual editing via a Web-based interface, as well as auto- mated editing via an API. Wikibase also includes detailed change tracking, and a SPARQL endpoint as the RDF query service a key technology for connecting with Linked Data and the Semantic Web.

community curated data is fully structured at time of submission, making it fully integrated into the knowledge network. Every contribution made in the graph is tracked (time, curator and change) in the history link of each entity page, either node or edge, and the structured review can be dumped and versioned from either Wikibase or Neo4j implementations.

http://ngly1graph.org/contribute/

--> Bad gateway :(

A structured review article helps to mine the gap of knowledge where other resources are incomplete or not expressive enough for the domain or question to solve.

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91866899)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91866899)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91866899/P921%3BP4510)  
