Theory of cell fate
===================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91908361]  

# Highlights

Cell fate decisions are controlled by complex intracellular molecular regulatory networks.

We will briefly introduce some notions from dynamical systems theory, and discuss how they offer a framework within which to build a rigorous understanding of what we mean by a cell “fate”, and how cells change fate. We will also outline how modern experiments, particu- larly high-throughput single-cell experiments, are enabling us to test and explore the limits of these ideas, and build a better understanding of cellular identities.

Cells in multicellular organisms typically specialize into distinct “types”, which perform specific functions within the context of the tissue, and organism, within which they reside. The concept of cell “type” has many definitions, reflecting the long history of cell biology and accumulation of experimental methods.

An early idea was that each distinct cell “type” carries only part of the genome and therefore has access to a different set of “instructions” of how to behave. This idea, although appealing, was proven false by pioneering experiments of Gurdon in the 1970s.

--> Might be partially true e.g. for aneuploid neurons and recombined lymphocytes.

From the purely biological point-of-view, this is the de facto working definition of a cell type: different cell types are defined by the different genes and proteins that they express, and the different functions they accordingly perform.

This simple, flexible definition of cell type has been disrupted with the advent of high-throughput, single-cell methods,
primarily single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) which have revealed substantial “heterogeneity” within previously established cell types

Increasingly it is becoming clear that traditional ways of identifying and categorizing cell types are unable to capture this complexity, leading to ambiguity as to what is really meant by a cell type. A rigorous, consistent definition of cell type, is therefore required to make use of this new wave of gene expression data. By developing such a theory, we can begin to address the question of why patterns of expression, and not some others, occur; or why particular patterns of expression should confer particular functions to the cell.

Mathematical models provide a logical frame- work within which to explore complex issues like this, and there has accordingly been a long and fruitful history of biologists and theoreticians working together to explore this issue theoretically, and wrestling with how mathematical notions relate to the complexity observed in experiment.


To begin our discussion, it is useful to distinguish between the state of a cell and its fate.Beforewestart it is worthnotingthat the terms cell “type” and cell “fate” are often used interchangeably. As a technicality, however, fate refers to the future of the cell—the “type” toward which it is progressing. For reasons that will become apparent, we will focus on cell fates specifically.

It is important to note that the state of the cell may (in fact, cer- tainly will) change over time, and so we make this explicit in our formalism from the start. It is also notable that a given experimental method will inevitably only measure a subset of the molecular identifiers that specify a cell, so the defini- tion of a cell state is contextual and will depend on the experimental method used.

Traditionally, there were thought to be 200–300 distinct cell fates in the adult human (Junqueira, Junqueira, Carneiro, & Kelley, 1992) (although by uncovering hitherto unappreciated heterogeneity within established cell types recent efforts, such as the Human Cell Atlas, are revising this estimate (Lukowski et al., 2019; Regev et al. (2017))

By contrast, the human genome contains approximately 20,000 genes (Church et al., 2009), each of which may be expressed at varying levels. Even if each gene can only be expressed at two levels (i.e., “on” or “off”) this gives ?220,000 distinct cell states.


It is clear, therefore, that not all molecular states can map to distinct cell fates. From a mathematical perspective this means that our mapping from cell states to cell fates is many-to-one (Figure 1).

Each point in the molecular state box is a complete descriptor of the molecular constitution of a cell. The mapping between states and fates is many-to-one: different subsets of expression state space may map to the same fates.

--> Why not many to many? 

informally an attractor of a dissipative dynamical system is an iso- lated subset of the state space A ∈ X toward which the system will evolve for a subset of initial conditions XA ∈ X.

This piece of dynamical systems theory offers us a simple way to interpret the structure of the mapping from geno- type to phenotype in a general way, as follows:
The intracellular regulatory networks that control cell fates encode a complex dynamical system that admits numerous coexisting attractors. Each of these attractors constitutes a distinct cell fate.

Before discussing the experimental implications of this dynamical systems view, it is worth noting that this perspective is a generalization of a view that is well known to biologists: Waddington's epigenetic landscape (Waddington, 2014).

It is clear from these quotes that Waddington had in mind that each cell fate is what we would now call a fixed-
point attractor, and that the dynamics are governed by a process of steepest descent on a landscape, the structure of which is determined by interactions between the genes.

here is, therefore, now a burgeoning field of single-cell analytics that aims to develop mathematical and computational methods specifically designed to dis- sect the structure of single-cell data, and relate observed structures to theoretical notions of cell fate (Cao et al., 2019; Moffitt et al., 2018; Rodriques et al., 2019).

although it is not often explicitly said, that the connection between data clusters and cell fates is motivated by the theory above. More precisely, in the presence of “noise” (which could be both due to technical measurement error, and/or biologically functional fluctuations in expression levels) theory predicts that clusters in the data will form around attractors of the deterministic dynamics.

A common, characteristic feature of these methods is that they recognize that to properly 

many experiments investi- gate cell populations as they transition from one fate to another. Because they probe the transition between fates, such dynamics are out-of-equilibrium.
understand expression data we need to refine our notion of “distance” between cells.

The theory described above also provides a simple framework to interpret these experiments.

Indeed, to properly understand modern experimental data, a sound theoretical foundation is needed. We anticipate that the coming years will see ever-closer integration of theory and experiment in this area that will, in turn, yield a deeper understanding of cell fate dynamics.
CONFLICT
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91908361)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91908361)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91908361/P921%3BP4510)  
