
BioHackathon 2015: Semantics of data for life sciences and reproducible research
================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92065187]  
  
Publication date : 24 of February, 2020  

# Highlights
 We describe our progress to address
ongoing challenges to the reusability and reproducibility of research
results, and identify outstanding issues that continue to impede the
progress of bioinformatics research. We share our perspective on the
state of the art, continued challenges, and goals for future research
and development for the life sciences Semantic Web.

Here, we present selected outcomes from BH15, self-organized
by the participants in projects around different topics, which
we discuss in the following sections. At the highest level, the
contours of these topics are, broadly, i) life sciences data,
including genotypes and phenotypes, orthology and phylogeny,
proteomics, metabolomics, and biochemical molecular;
and ii) research methods, i.e. the technologies that support
in silico analysis in the life sciences, including data retrieval
and querying, natural language processing, reproducibility,
and semantic metadata.

Part of the strategy to precision medicine involves
more precise clinical phenotyping. The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) is an ontology of abnormal phenotypes associated
with human disease

We previously developed
an ontology for annotating biochemical transformations called
Partial Information of chemical transformation (PIERO,129).

During BH15, participants developed
routines to generate GlycoRDF data from WURCS 2.0 nomenclature, which is used by the GlyTouCan structure repository1

Crick-Chan query parsing. While LOD and the Semantic
Web are rapidly adopted in the biology domain, the majority of biological knowledge is still only available in the form of
natural language text, for example in manuscripts on PubMed
or in textbooks on the NCBI Bookshelf

- Muito cringe

Semantic haiku generation. Natural language generation is the
longstanding problem of generating textual output from textual
or non-textual sources196–200. The field has a number of potential applications in the life sciences201–205. One of the projects
of BH15 included the construction of a “semantic” haiku
generator

A haiku is a type of poem traditional to
Japan; it consists of three verses with five, seven, and five
syllables.

An initial test of the script using the
UniProt SPARQL endpoint together with the human Amyloid
beta213 protein, which resulted in the following haiku:
Amyloid beta
protein classified with blood
Coagulation

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first “semantic” haiku.
Although it follows the haiku pattern, additional work is still
required to generate haikus that have additional haiku qualities,
in particular the occurrence of a word related to one of the four
seasons, as tradition requires.

The BioHackathon series offers an unparalleled opportunity
for scientists and software developers to work together to tackle
challenging problems in the life sciences. BH15, the 2015
edition, was no exception, and featured contributions from a
wide range of subdisciplines.

BH15 was held in Nagasaki, Japan, over the period of
September 14th to 18th 2015, and was hosted by the National
Bioscience Database Center (NBDC,18) and the Database
Center for Life Science (DBCLS,19) to promote interoperability of life sciences databases in Japan. Researchers and developers from around the world participated by invitation.


As requirements for
providing higher quality data and metadata continue to grow
worldwide, BioHackathon participants will be well positioned
to develop and apply semantic technologies to face the challenges
of tomorrow.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92065187)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92065187)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q92065187&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.12688/F1000RESEARCH.18236.1)  
