
Atheroprotective roles of smooth muscle cell phenotypic modulation and the TCF21 disease gene as revealed by single-cell analysis
=================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92267490]  
  
Publication date : 29 of July, 2019  

# Highlights

Using single cell RNA sequencing, we comprehensively characterized the transcriptomic phenotype of modulated SMCs in vivo in atherosclerotic lesions of both mouse and human arteries and found that these cells transform into unique fibroblast-like cells, termed “fibromyocytes”, rather than into a classical macrophage phenotype

d. Using single cell RNA sequencing, we comprehensively characterized the transcriptomic phenotype of modulated SMCs in vivo in atherosclerotic lesions of both mouse and human arteries and found that these cells transform into unique fibroblast-like cells, termed “fibromyocytes”, rather than into a classical macrophage phenotype.

Despite the significant uncertainty regarding the phenotype of modulated SMCs, it has become increasingly clear that these cells are an important component of the developing plaque in animal models of atherosclerosis.

 Similarly, in cultured human coronary artery SMCs (HCASMCs), TCF21 knockdown results in up regulation of SMC differentiation markers

 op differentially-expressed genes distinguishing phenotypically modulated SMCs (fibromyocytes) from contractile SMCs (SMC1 and SMC2) 

 o contiguous clusters, labeled “SMC” and “Fibromyocyte” (Fig. 4a), were characterized by diminishing calponin (CNN1) expression (Fig. 4b), which appeared to parallel the gradual loss of CNN1 expression in murine fibromyocytes (Fig. 2c). 

 We found that the gene TNFRSF11B, encoding osteoprotegerin (OPG), exhibited 97% specificity and 53% sensitivity for human fibromyocytes in the scRNAseq dataset (Fig. 4e). We then performed RNAscope in-situ hybridization to visualize the distribution of TNFRSF11B within the human lesions. This revealed strong TNFRSF11B staining primarily in the fibrous neointima (Fig. 4f, Extended Data Fig. 4b), with few cells strongly positive for TNFRSF11B in the media or the adventitia, consistent with the expected location of fibromyocyte.

 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92267490)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92267490)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q92267490/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q92267490&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41591-019-0512-5)  
