
Characterization of cell fate probabilities in single-cell data with Palantir
=============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92539085]  
  
Publication date : 21 of March, 2019  

# Highlights

Palantir, an algorithm that models trajectories of differentiating  cells  by  treating  cell  fate  as  a  probabilistic  process  and  leverages  entropy  to  measure  cell  plasticity  along  the  trajectory.

 We apply our algorithm to human bone marrow single-cell RNA sequencing data and detect important landmarks of hematopoietic differentiation.

 Differentiation   proceeds   through  cell  divisions,  where  daughter  cells  are  generally  very  similar  to  their  mother  cells.  Thus,  the  population  is  established  by incremental divergences, driven by regulatory mechanisms that create paths through the space of possible cell states (phenotypes).

e assert that cells traverse the manifold in small steps which can be modeled using a Markov chain to represent cell fate choices in a probabilistic manner, based on two key assumptions. Firstly, as in all pseudo-time infer-ence  algorithms1,3,7,8,  we  assume  unidirectional  progression  from  a  less- to a more-differentiated state# Comments


iven  scRNA-seq  data  from  a  sample  of  differentiating  cells  and  the  expression  profile  of  a  user-defined  ‘early’  cell,  Palantir  orders  cells  along  a  pseudo-time,


A  number  of  single-cell  studies4,6  have  hypothesized  that  hema-topoietic  decision-making  is  a  continuous  process,  but  that  it  lacks  hierarchy.  However,  these  studies  were  based  on  sorted  populations  and  might  have  missed  intermediate  cell  stages;  more importantly, the relative proportions of different cell types were not retained. On the other hand, lineage-tracing studies of murine  hematopoiesis22  support  a  hierarchical  developmental  model with step-wise losses in potential as stem cells differentiate into specific cell types.

Erythrocytes   are   derived   from   megakaryocyte-erythroid   precursor  cells

--> This is something that it would be good to represent on wiki.

The high-resolution ordering of Palantir allows us to character-ize  the  order  and  timing  of  events  during  erythropoiesis.  We  find  that  upregulation  of  KLF1  is  followed  by  upregulation  of  KLF3,  a  known  target  of  KLF1  that  stabilizes  the  erythroid  program 

 test whether Palantir generalizes beyond hematopoietic data-sets,  we  applied  it  to  a  mouse  colon  differentiation  dataset  gener-ated  using  the  InDrop  platform35.  Lgr5+  stem  cells  were  shown  to  differentiate  to  colonocytes,  tuft  cells,  goblet  cells,  and  Reg4+  gob-let  cells  (Fig.  5f).

 Unlike   existing   algorithms,   Palantir   generates   a   probabilistic   model of cell fate choice as a continuous process. Palantir is robust to  parameters,  reproducible  across  replicates,  and  generalizes  to  diverse  datasets

Monocle 2 (ref. 17) and FateID37 (using RaceID clustering) fail to generate a coherent map of hematopoiesis (Supplementary Figs. 18  and  21

e anticipate that Palantir will be a valuable discovery tool for many  less-characterized  systems,  including  those  profiled  by  the  Human  Cell  Atlas  Project


## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92539085)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92539085)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q92539085/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q92539085&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41587-019-0068-4)  
