
Single cell transcriptome analysis of developing arcuate nucleus neurons uncovers their key developmental regulators
====================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92668670]  
  
Publication date : 16 of August, 2019  

# Highlights

Despite the crucial physiological processes governed by neurons in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus (ARC), such as growth, reproduction and energy homeostasis, the developmental pathways and regulators for ARC neurons remain understudied. 
Our single cell RNA-seq analyses of mouse embryonic ARC revealed many cell type-specific markers for developing ARC neurons

 In particular, the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus (ARC) directly responds to peripheral cues due to its anatomic location in proximity to the blood stream

 However, the gene regulatory network that governs the production of ARC neurons remains poorly understood.

 The ARC consists of many types of neurons expressing specific sets of neuropeptides that elicit disparate physiological actions

Using GFP reporter mice, cell type-specific transcriptomes of adult Agrp-neurons and Pomc-neurons have been determined.


 Further, the recent scRNA-seq analysis of the adult ARC revealed that ARC neuronal composition is more complex than previously recognized15. This study identified 24 distinct ARC neuronal types15, including three types of Pomc-neurons, two types of Agrp-neurons (named Sst-expressing AgrpSst-neurons, and Gm8773-expressing AgrpGm8773-neurons), and six types of Th+ neurons (Ghrh-neurons and five additional types of Th+ neurons).

 f note, none of the clusters or their subclusters in our dataset showed a high similarity to another adult Agrp-neuronal type n13 AgrpGm8773-neurons, but the six subclusters c2-s0, c4-s0, c5-s1, c6-s1, c7-s0, and c8-s0 show a limited similarity to these neurons (Supplementary Fig. 4–9). Some cells in these subclusters in embryonic ARC may develop to become n13 AgrpGm8773-neuronal type at a later stage.

 


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92668670)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92668670)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q92668670&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41467-019-11667-Y)  
