
Comprehensive Integration of Single-Cell Data
=============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92614138]  
  
Publication date : 06 of June, 2019  

# Highlights

A computational approach to integrate
diverse modalities associated with
single-cell sequencing datasets can be
used to better understand cellular identity
and function


Seurat v3 identifies correspondences between cells in
different experiments
d These ‘‘anchors’’ can be used to harmonize datasets into a
single reference


we anchor scRNA-seq experiments
with scATAC-seq to explore chromatin differences in
closely related interneuron subsets and project protein expression measurements onto a bone marrow
atlas to characterize lymphocyte populations. Lastly,
we harmonize in situ gene expression and scRNAseq datasets, allowing transcriptome-wide imputation of spatial gene expression patterns.

--> Cool

First, how can disparate
single-cell datasets, produced across individuals, technologies,
and modalities be harmonized into a single reference? Second,
once a reference has been constructed, how can its data and
meta-data improve the analysis of new experiments

, we recently introduced
the use of canonical correlation analysis (CCA), alongside independent pioneering work leveraging the
identification of mutual nearest neighbors (MNNs) [Haghverdi
et al., 2018], to identify shared subpopulations across datasets


In order to relate different experiments
to each other, we assume that there are correspondences between datasets and that at least a subset of cells represent a
shared biological state. Inspired by the concept of MNNs, we
represent these correspondences as two cells (one from each
dataset) that we expect to be defined by a common set of
molecular features (Haghverdi et al., 2018).

High-scoring correspondences therefore represent
cases where many similar cells in one dataset are predicted to
correspond to the same group of similar cells in a second dataset, reflecting increased robustness in the association between
the anchor cells.

Before correcting for technical differences, the cells
separated by a combination of dataset of origin and cell type,
hindering downstream analysis (Figure S1A). After applying our
integration procedure, technical distinctions between datasets
were effectively removed (Figure S1B), while major and minor
cell populations could be identified through unsupervised
graph-based clustering.

 In particular, we note that this harmonized
resource provides exceptional power to detect rare populations,
such as tissue-resident plasmacytoid dendritic cells (0.07% cells
detected in nine tissues) and mesothelial cells (0.05% cells
detected in five tissues), that could not be robustly identified in
individual dataset analysis (Figure S2C, S2E, and S2F). These results suggest an analytical path forward when similar atlas-scale
datasets are generated across human tissues with diverse technologies (Regev et al., 2017).

--> Very cool.


We next examined the possibility of applying our classification
strategy to transfer cell labels across modalities. For example,
we explored whether we could classify individual nuclei from a
scATAC-seq dataset based on a reference of transcriptomic
states

--> Nice



We performed a CITE-seq experiment on human bone marrow
cells (Stoeckius et al., 2017), capturing 33,454 cells for which
we measured cellular transcriptomes alongside 25 cell-surface
proteins representing well-characterized markers (median
4,575 RNA unique molecular identifiers [UMIs] and 2,312 antibody-derived tag [ADT] UMIs per cell; Tables S1C and S1D;
Data S1). We first performed cross-validation within the CITEseq data by randomly assigning cells to a reference or query dataset and identified anchors between them. As with our discrete
classifications, we predicted protein levels in the query dataset
using a weighted average of CITE-seq counts from the reference
anchor cells, which we then compared with the original measurements (Figure 4A).


By
integrating single-cell transcriptomics with spatial datasets,
these analyses can consider not only broadly defined cell types,
but also subtle alterations in cell state, even for genes that are not
directly measured in an imaging probe set. Future extensions
could utilize these molecular data to assist in the image alignment of multiple datasets or even integrate with perturbation
screens to help infer causal relationships (Dixit et al., 2016).

. Both Seurat v3 and LIGER enable batch-effect correction and cross-modality integration, and while the
methods have conceptually similar aims, they return complementary outputs. NMF returns factors that characterize biological sources of variation and can be highly interpretable (Welch et al., 2019). In contrast, Seurat v3 has the ability to return a corrected expression matrix or to impute query features from a
reference dataset—both of which can be used as input to additional methods such as pseudotime or network reconstruction.

. Both Seurat v3 and LIGER enable batch-effect
correction and cross-modality integration, and while the
methods have conceptually similar aims, they return complementary outputs. NMF returns factors that characterize biological sources of variation and can be highly interpretable (Welch
et al., 2019). In contrast, Seurat v3 has the ability to return a corrected expression matrix or to impute query features from a
reference dataset—both of which can be used as input to additional methods such as pseudotime or network reconstruction

# Comments

# Tags
#1.1.2. Interoperable data: dataset integration

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92614138)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92614138)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q92614138/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Comprehensive%20Integration%20of%20Single-Cell%20Data'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
