
Single-cell analysis reveals new evolutionary complexity in uveal melanoma
==========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92932258]  
  
Publication date : 24 of January, 2020  

# Highlights

Uveal melanoma (UM) is a highly metastatic cancer that, in contrast to cutaneous melanoma,is  largely  unresponsive  to  checkpoint  immunotherapy.
ere,  we  interrogate  the  tumormicroenvironment  at  single-cell  resolution  using  scRNA-seq  of  59,915  tumor  and  non-neoplastic cells from 8 primary and 3 metastatic samples

Tumor-infiltrating immune cells comprise apreviously  unrecognized  diversity  of  cell  types,  including  CD8+T  cells  predominantlyexpressing the checkpoint marker LAG3, rather than PD1 or CTLA4. V(D)J analysis showsclonally expanded T cells, indicating that they are capable of mounting an immune response

Next, we used CNVs as a means toprobe the clonal structure of each tumor. The CNV content ofindividual cells was ascertained from scRNA-seq data usinginferCNV, which was orthogonally validated against scDNA-seq(Supplementary Fig. 4a

--> Cool methods

Class 1 PRAME+tumor cell


nterestingly,among the 12 genes comprising the validated GEP clinicalprognostic test11,five are expressed predominantly in tumor cellsas expected (EIF1B, HTR2B, ECM1, CDH1, andROBO1)

imilar tofindings in othercancer types18,LAG3is also expressed in some CD4+T cells,FOXP3+regulatory T cells, NK cells, and macrophage/monocytes(Supplementary Fig. 10). CD14+monocytes/macrophages arepresent in all primary and metastatic samples, with CD68+macrophages displaying a spectrum from M1- to M2-polarization

Tumor cells were further divided into subgroups by expression ofPRAMEand GEP genes (Supplementary Fig. 1). The following cell types were annotated using:T Cells (CD3D,CD3E,CD8A), B cells (CD19,CD79A,MS4A1[CD20]), Plasma cells(IGHG1,MZB1,SDC1,CD79A), Monocytes and macrophages (CD68,CD163,CD14),NK Cells (FGFBP2,FCG3RA,CX3CR1), Retinal pigment epithelium (RPE65), Pho-toreceptor cells (RCVRN), Fibroblasts (FGF7), and Endothelial cells (PECAM1,VWF)


The Update-SeuratObject(), RidgePlot(), and DotPlot() functions were utilized to generate theplots from the Seurat 2 dataset generated above. Additional packages used for dataanalysis include: ggplot2 (2.3.1,3.1.1), dplyr (0.7.8, 0.8.0.1), Rtsne (0.15), forcats (0.3.0,0.40), bindrcpp (0.2.2), cowplot (0.9.3), Matrix (1.2-16), scales (1.0.0), jpeg (0.1-8),colorRamps (2.3), paletter (0.0.0.9000), cellranger (1.1.0), DDRTree (0.1.5), psycho(0.4.9), tidyverse (1.2.1), tibble (2.1.1), VGAM (1.1-1), irlba (2.3.3), stringr (1.4.0),Biobase (2.42.0), purrr (0.3.2), readr (1.3.1), ggpubr (0.2v).

--> Nice that the versions are there, but this is not that much reproducible

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92932258)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92932258)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q92932258/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q92932258&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41467-019-14256-1)  
