
Cell stress in cortical organoids impairs molecular subtype specification
=========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q93040438]  
  
Publication date : 29 of January, 2020  

# Highlights

We find that cortical development is characterized by progenitor maturation trajectories, the emergence of diverse cell subtypes and areal specification of newborn neurons. 

 Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) provides a powerful method for comparing the fidelity of organoid cell types to their primary cell counterparts across tissues.

 To characterize molecu-lar features and gene-expression signatures during human cortical development, we performed scRNA-seq of dissociated cells from five cortical samples collected at 6–22 gestational weeks (GW), encompass-ing the period of neurogenesis.

o assess cell-type differences across cortical areas, we studied primary samples from seven regions, includ-ing prefrontal (PFC), motor, parietal, somatosensory and primary visual (V1) cortices as well as hippocampus, resulting in transcriptomic data from 189,409 cells (Methods, Fig. 1a, Supplementary Table 1). These primary data were compared to data from 235,121 single cells from 37 organoids (Fig. 1b)

--> Damn, many cells!

 markers of cell-type identity depict progenitors (SOX2), oRGs (HOPX), IPCs (EOMES), newborn neurons (NEUROD6), maturing neurons (SATB2) and inhibitory interneurons (DLX6-AS1)


 Impaired cell-type fidelity in organoidsWe identified broad cell types that corresponded to radial glia, inter-mediate progenitor cells (IPCs), maturing neurons and interneurons in both datasets (Fig. 1, Supplementary Tables 2, 3)

 Neural class and proliferative state were largely preserved, as has been previously reported3,4,8,13. However, cell types (P = 1.02 × 10−20) and subtypes (P = 5.34 × 10−38) were significantly less well correlated to all organoid-derived cells, regardless of protocol (Fig. 2a).

  To explore the maturation of progenitor cells, we used weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA26) to generate gene modules of strongly correlated genes in primary radial glia

  We noted similar subtypes when we compared pre-transplanta-tion cell clusters and our primary reference data. By contrast, post-transplanted primary cells had significantly lower subtype correlation, similar to organoid cells, and they lacked markers of specific progenitor or neuronal subtypes (Fig. 5b, Extended Data Fig. 14e)

   Using single-cell transcriptomics, we have identified broad cell classes and types, as well as fine-grained subtypes such as outer radial glia progenitors in primary human samples. 

   
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q93040438)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q93040438)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q93040438/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q93040438&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-020-1962-0)  
