
Function first: classifying cell types and circuits of the retina
=================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q93189154]  

# Highlights


Here, we argue that functional information about retinal cells should be prioritized over other criteria. In total, the mammalian retina likely contains 100 neuron types alone. A scheme resulting from one criterion can be puzzlingly misaligned with a scheme resulting from another criterion.

Are the genetically identified JAM-B cells functionally of a single type, several distinct but regional types, or, perhaps, a spectrum of types? 

DS RGCs are well-defined and consistent in terms of function and circuitry, and numerous genetic markers that label DS RGCs there is none that clearly captures the funcionally defined population of DS RGCs.

Create useful, working definitions of cell types (nominal definitions) that aid in the project of identifying, studying, and exchanging knowledge about them. Second, once a classification scheme is completely developed, this can reveal the essential features of each cell type — their real definitions.

--> The essentialist view resurfacing 40 years later, see  [@wikidata:Q41052480]

From a practical standpoint, the usefulness of a given classification depends on the specific inquiry a scientist chooses to undertake: to understand the development of circuits, prioritizing a connectomic classification would be essential. To understand differences in evolutionary origin of cell types or their protein expression, an mRNA transcription profile-based classification may be more useful than one based on cell morphology.

Should a cell type be divided into three types because of differences in gene expression, when the functional properties are observed to be the same for the stimulus set used?

One example of well-aligned retinal classification schemes are Bipolar cells (BCs) of the mouse retina. Studies using functional, morphological or genetic criteria converge onto the same number of 14 bipolar cell types. There are 3 different type 5 BC ‘versions’ (types 5t, 5o and 5i). Interestingly, both morphologically and genetically, the type 5 BCs are very close together.

If gene expression or morphology is prioritized in classifying these cells, a popular criterion at the moment, then there are three cell types. However, one could argue that type 5 BCs should be considered one functional type for the time being until a clear functional/ circuit-level criterion can be used to divide them up.

For us, these results suggest that the circuit context of these cells lead to important functional differences that one would want to recognize in a functional classification scheme. Recently, several large-scale classifications have been published, and many recent datasets now include much larger populations of retinal cells than before.

In our view, an ideal classification approach may require utilizing a set of classification criteria depending on the hypothesis in question.

# Comments

Talks about the retina as a good tissue for these considerations, due to well defined and well characterized cell types, a simplicity of types of input and output and the fact that any patch contains likely almost all cell types.

Arguments kind of revolve around each cell having one "final type". Cells have  multiple types. And a type that contain more than one subtype regarding one property, might be the "end type" for that one.

Very similar subdivisions as a product of technical issues --> The necessity of robustness. 

Same cells, circuitry differences imply functional differences! But identical cups used for flour and for beer are the same type of cup?

The final point of "In our view, an ideal classification approach may require utilizing a set of classification criteria depending on the hypothesis in question ." is quite the same of mine. 

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q93189154)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q93189154)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q93189154/P921%3BP4510)  
