
Regulation of cell-type-specific transcriptomes by microRNA networks during human brain development
===================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q93223327]  
  
Publication date : 19 of November, 2018  

# Highlights

ombining multiple complementary approaches, high-throughput sequencing of RNA isolated by cross-linking immunoprecipitation with an antibody to AGO2 (AGO2-HITS-CLIP), single-cell profiling and computational analyses using bipartite and coexpression networks, we show that miRNA-mRNA interactions operate as functional modules that often correspond to cell-type identities

. Changes in miRNA expression
patterns that are often large in magnitude occur as defining decision nodes during cell differentiation6
. This suggests that their
cell-type-specific abundance is an important parameter in cell-type
identity and provides insights beyond cell-type classification into
the dynamic regulation of differentiation.

simultaneous
single-cell profiling data of mRNAs and miRNAs

). To our surprise, hundreds of the in vivo miRNA targets we
identified were well-established markers of distinct cell types15–17, 

. We profiled single cells isolated
from human cortex samples at GW14 (deep layer neurogenesis)
and GW17 (upper layer neurogenesis) 

o our surprise, the vast
majority of miRNAs we profiled showed significant enrichment
in at least one cell type, suggesting robust variation in miRNA
abundance across closely related cells of the developing brain

Fig. 2d, Heatmap representing cell-type-enriched miRNA expression profiled (one-tailed U test). Cell-type enrichments were calculated for cells captured from
two biologically independent specimen

--> Nice


miR-2115 regulates cell cycle in human radial glia. The developmental transition between GW15–16.5 and GW19–20.5 coincides
with changes in proliferation rates of radial glia and depletion of
proliferative capacity in the human ventricular zone38. Among the
top five miRNAs differentially expressed between these stages, a
great-ape-specific miRNA, miR-2115, was prominently upregulated
at GW19–20 in the germinal zones (Fig. 3a,b and Supplementary
Figs. 5 and 7). Among miR-2115 targets, ORC4, a known regulator
of DNA replication39, was enriched in radial glia at early stages of
development

--> Highlight the temporal nature of cell types

We found that groups of miRNAs can assume cell-type-specific patterns of expression and can
regulate hundreds of cell-type-specific transcripts.


# Comments
The simultaneous profiling data might be interesting.


## Tags

1.4.4. Types of knowledge about cell types --> microRNA

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q93223327)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q93223327)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q93223327/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Regulation%20of%20cell-type-specific%20transcriptomes%20by%20microRNA%20networks%20during%20human%20brain%20development'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
