
Systematic comparison of single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-sequencing methods
==============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q93270907]  
  
Publication date : 06 of April, 2020  

# Highlights

To directly compare the methods and avoid processing differences introduced by the existing pipelines, we developed scumi, a flexible computational pipeline that can be used with any single-cell RNA-sequencing method. We evaluated the methods for both basic performance, such as the struc-ture and alignment of reads, sensitivity and extent of multiplets, and for their ability to recover known biological information in the samples


Here,  we  systematically  and  directly  compared  seven  methods  (Fig. 1  and  Extended  Data  Fig.  1),  including  two  low-throughput  plate-based methods (Smart-seq2 (ref. 5) and CEL-Seq2 (ref. 6)) and five  high-throughput  methods  (10x  Chromium9,  Drop-seq8,  Seq-We l l10, inDrops7 and sci-RNA-seq12), producing expression profiles from  ~92,000  cells  overall

--> Good comparisons for 1.4.2.1. Wet-lab methods and their differences

As scRNA-seq methods start with limited RNA inputs, a key quality metric is the sensitivity, or the ability to capture RNA molecules. We assessed the sensitivity of each method by measuring the number of detected UMIs or genes per cell in datasets sampled to the same number of reads per cell (Methods; Supplementary Table 2)

In the mixture experiment, we were able to assess the frequency of multiplets, because we started with a mixture of human and mouse cells. The observed multiplet rates were <3.5% for all seven tested methods (Fig. 2c),

First, using a coherently and reproducibly collected set of data, spanning three sample types, it provides direct guidance on key methods by a rich set of parameters and considerations – from technical to biological. It spans key and popular methods, including the first comparison of single nucleus RNA-seq methods. 



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q93270907)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q93270907)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q93270907/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q93270907&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41587-020-0465-8)  
