
Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals the heterogeneity of liver-resident immune cells in human
============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q94464890]  
  
Publication date : 28 of April, 2020  

# Highlights

The liver-resident immune cells (LrICs) determine the immune properties, but the unique composition and heterogeneity of these cells are incompletely
understood. Here, we dissect the diversity of LrICs by a comprehensive transcriptomic profiling 

We identified more than 30 discrete cell populations
comprising 13 of T and NK cell, 7 of B cell, 4 of plasma cell, and 8 of myeloid cell subsets in human liver and donorpaired spleen and blood, and characterized their tissue distribution, gene expression and functional modules.
Especially, four of CXCR6+ T and NK cell subsets were found to be present preferentially in the liver, where they
manifested heterogeneity, distinct function and prominent homeostatic proliferation.

--> Preferential localization, - 1.4.4. Types of knowledge about cell types


Recent reports identify the existence of LrT cells5
, LrNK cells6,7 and macrophage8 , which display notable differences compared to those in circulation9.

Here,
we use scRNA-seq to provide the first unbiased and
comprehensive atlas of intrahepatic CD45+ immune cells
in relation to paired spleen and PBMCs from liver
transplant donors

--> This "unbiased" always bugs me


 We observed 23 distinct cell
clusters (C) composed of 4 major cell subtypes, including
NK & T, B, myeloid and plasma cells (PC) (Fig. 1b),

--> Interesting set of "major" types.

each identified by their unique signature genes CD3D (T cell
marker), KLRF1 (NKp80, NK marker), CD19 (B cell marker), SDC1 (CD138, PC marker), CD14 (monocyte marker)
and FCGR3A (CD16), respectively (Fig. 1c)

- 3.1.  Cell-type markers in Wikidata

 basing on the typical marker expressions and
their unique distributions (Fig. 2b; Supplementary Fig.
S4a, Table S3). 


- 3.1.  Cell-type markers in Wikidata

r. a UMAP analysis of human T and NK cells showing 16
clusters

C8 identifies mucosal-associated invariant T cells (MAIT)
cells, C9 for CD8+ tissue-resident memory T (Trm) cells,
C10 for γδ T cells, C11 for CD8+ T cell expressing
cytotoxic markers (GZMB+ CD8+ Tc). C12 is the tissueresident NK (TrNK) subset, while C13 is the conventional
NK subset expressing cytotoxic markers (GZMB+ cNK).
C14 identifies ILCs. C15 identifies replicating T and NK
cell subsets. Comparing blood, spleen and liver facilitated
the dissection of tissue distribution patterns by various T
and NK cell subsets (Fig. 2c). We identified that C3 (TFH)
and C7 (TFC) preferentially resided in spleen representing
the follicular CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell populations,
respectively, while C8 (MAIT), C9 (Trm), C10 (γδ T), and
C12 (TrNK) resided in human liver as the tissue resident
cell populations (Fig. 2c, d)

--> Very granular, but almost certainly overfitted, as there is no clear separation. e.g. some CD8 cells are likely characterized as CD4 or vice versa. 


Characterization of cycling T and NK cells from human spleen and liver by scRNA-seq. a UMAP plot of cycling T and NK cells showing a
seven-cluster distribution
--> Very granular, but almost certainly overfitted, as there is no clear separation.

4b. the heatmap indicating the
expression of specific genes by chemokine receptors-defined NK & T cell clusters. Chemokine receptors expression correlates with the differentiation,
effectorness and distribution patterns of CD8+ T and NK cell subsets

--> Looks cool, - 1.4.4. Types of knowledge about cell types

Our study provides the first transcriptional atlas of
LrICs and identifies their heterogeneity in healthy donors

Finally, we produced the first scRNA atlas of large
numbers of human B cells and ASCs and confirmed the
existence of previously reported naive B, cMBC, CD11c+
ABC, and MZB subset and PB and PC, and identified
three additional B-cell subsets including GCB cells,
cycling ZBTB32+ memory B cells and ISG+ B cells as well
as two populations of previously unidentified PCs.


Table 1 Summary of the critical features of each cell type identified in the study


--> Yes!!! Thank you so much! This goes right to Wikidata! 
--> Note: does PB here means Plasmablast or peripheral blood?

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q94464890)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q94464890)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q94464890/P921%3BP4510)  
