
Community curation in PomBase: enabling fission yeast experts to provide detailed, standardized, sharable annotation from research publications
===============================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q94470608]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2020  

# Highlights

With 8 years’ experience, and as the author response rate reaches 50%, we review community curation progress and the insights we have gained from the project. We highlight incentives and nudges we deploy to maximize participation, and summarize project outcomes, which include increased knowledge integration and dissemination as well as the unanticipated added value arising from co-curation by publication authors and professional curators.

Notably, WormBase successfully solicits first-pass annotation from users and has pioneered integrating author curation with the publication process

A well-characterized and well-annotated gene product in a model species may be associated with hundreds of publications, most of which provide some unique knowledge. Rapid access to this detailed gene-specific knowledge is fundamental to the biological research community, but it is prohibitively time-consuming and cost-ineffective for researchers to collate individually

The community depends heavily on PomBase, with 81% reporting daily or weekly use.

The Canto annotation tool. A user-friendly step-by-step annotation workflow guides new users through finding ontology terms and completing annotations.

 For PomBase, Canto supports ontology-based annotations, including all three branches of the Gene Ontology (GO) (13,14), phenotypes using the Fission Yeast Phenotype Ontology (FYPO) (15) and protein modifications using PSI-MOD (16). Genetic and physical interactions are captured using the BioGRID system (17). 

 Specific aspects of the PomBase community curation project fit the four broad principles described by the Behavioural Insights Team (https://www.bi.team/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/BIT-Publication-EAST_FA_WEB.pdf), whereby making an activity Easy, Attractive, Social and Timely (EAST) increases participation.

 --> This is a good framework

 Encouragingly, the most common reason reported for non-participation was not having published suitable papers, and very few respondents chose options indicating that they did not understand how they or the community would benefit from community curation (Figure 3B).

 We maintain metrics of curation progress (https://curation.pombase.org/pombe/stats/annotation), which identify the growing community contribution to the overall PomBase annotation corpus (percentages, numbers of publications, numbers of annotations). 

Once a curation session is submitted, annotations are then checked by a professional curator who often extends or refines the curation in consultation with the authors. 

 In the second example, an author annotated a ‘resistance to chemical’ phenotype because one mutant grew better than another. Compared to wild type, however, growth was normal, and PomBase phenotypes all use wild type as the reference.

  A wide range of research communities, and the scientific efforts they pursue, thus stand to benefit from widening participation in literature curation.





# Comments

## Tags
--> PomBase, canto and community curation - 3.2.2. Community curation and gamified science

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q94470608)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q94470608)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q94470608/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q94470608&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/DATABASE/BAAA028)  
