
Clinical validity of expanded carrier screening: evaluating the gene-disease relationship in more than 200 conditions
=====================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q94558276]  
  
Publication date : 07 of May, 2020  

# Highlights

s. The Clinical Genome Resource (ClinGen) gene curation framework was used to assess genetic and experimental evidence of associations between 208 genes and conditions screened on two commercial ECS panels. Twenty-one conditions were previously classified by ClinGen, and the remaining 187 were evaluated by curation teams at two laboratories. To ensure consistent application of the framework across the laboratories, concordance was evaluated on a subset of conditions. All 208 evaluated conditions met the evidence threshold for supporting a gene-disease association. Furthermore, 203 of 208 (98%) achieved the strongest (“Definitive”) level of gene-disease association.


The purpose of carrier screening is to determine whether couples are at high risk of having children affected with serious genetic conditions,

 For example, of 21 genes included on panels assessing single-gene causes of Brugada syndrome, an arrhythmia condition that increases risk for sudden cardiac death, only one gene (SCN5A) was classified as having Definitive evidence of clinical validity, while the remaining 20 were classified as Disputed (Hosseini et al., 2018). The study concluded that more evidence was needed before genes other than SCN5A are tested as the cause of Brugada syndrome (Hosseini et al., 2018).

In this study, one gene, HYLS1, was classified as having Limited evidence, the lowest of the supportive categories. In several studies applying the ClinGen framework, discussion of genes classified as Limited has noted the need to regularly revisit curations so that new evidence can be assessed (Grant et al., 2018; McGlaughon et al., 2019; Renard et al., 2018). McGlaughon,Goldstein, Thaxton, Hemphill, and Berg (2018) retrospectively analyzed classifications of 22 gene-disease pairs curated yearly, and found that gene-disease associations at the low end of the Limited point range (<2 points) are more likely to remain Limited or become Disputed/Refuted than those initially scored in mid to upper Limited point range (2–6 points) (McGlaughon et al., 2018)




# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q94558276)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q94558276)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q94558276/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q94558276&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/HUMU.24033)  
