
Drug repositioning for psychiatric and neurological disorders through a network medicine approach
=================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q94600062]  
  
Publication date : 12 of May, 2020  

# Highlights

Using IBM Watson for Drug Discovery, a powerful machine learning text-mining application, we built knowledgenetworks containing connections between PNDs and genes or drugs mentioned in the scientific literature publishedin the past 50 years

 This approach revealed several drugs that target key PND-related genes, which have never beenused to treat these disorders to date. We validate our framework by detecting drugs that have been undergoingclinical trial for treating some of the PNDs, but have no published results in their support.

 We used the IBM WDD, an online tool, to performqueries for major PNDs: Alzheimer’s disease, dementia,anxiety, depression, Huntington’s disease, Parkinson’sdisease, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and autism. Weperformed two independent searches using WDD: one forgenes associated with PNDs (gene–PND) and another fordrugs associated with PNDs (drug–PND). WDD detectsassociations in original papers and reviews from PMCOpen Access (full text), Pubmed (abstracts), and patents.Relationships  are  detected  by  a  natural  language-processing algorithm when two entities of interest (gene,disease, or drug) are present in the same sentence of adocument and are connected through a verb or preposi-tion.  WDD  gives  relationships  a  confidence  score(0–100%) based on the number of documents supportingthe connection and on link meaningfulness. Only rela-tions with at least two documents of evidence and aconfidence score >50% were maintained in our study.

The repositioning with Open Targets21database wasperformed using a custom R code. This script, which isavailable  on  GitHub  (https://github.com/csbl-usp/OpenTargets_drug_repositioning),  accesses  the  plat-form API client of Open Targets database and performsthe same steps done for the drug repositioning withWDD. 

We performed functional enrichment analyses with thegenes in each module and with those unique to each PND(Fig.2a). For all the modules, we found well-known,hallmark molecular characteristics of PNDs (Fig.2, Sup-plementary results).

Genes in the bipolar disorder and schizophrenia module(Fig.2e) were enriched for long-term potentiation (LTP)and circadian entrainment (Fig.2e). Those unique tobipolar disorder were also enriched for circadian rhythm(PER3 and RORB; Fig.2e)

Fig. 4 Drugs with high repositioning potential for PNDs. a–cThe most promising repositioning drug candidates (blue) that target the genes (red)unique to Alzheimer’s disease (a), schizophrenia (b), and autism and bipolar disorder
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q94600062)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q94600062)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q94600062/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q94600062&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41398-020-0827-5)  
