
Characterization of the development of the mouse cochlear epithelium at the single cell level
=============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q94671498]  
  
Publication date : 13 of May, 2020  

# Highlights

Mammalian hearing requires the development of the organ of Corti, a sensory epithelium
comprising unique cell types.

To examine cochlear development more closely, we tran-
scriptionally proﬁle approximately 30,000 isolated mouse cochlear cells collected at four
developmental time points.

The organ of Corti (OC), located in the ﬂoor of the scala
media of the cochlea, acts as the primary sensory trans-
ducer of sound in mammals. This structure comprises a
highly diverse cellular mosaic that includes two different types of
mechanosensory hair cells (HCs), and an undeﬁned number of
associated supporting cell (SC) types (Fig. 1a).

Characterization of cochlear cell types at P1. As a ﬁrst step,
14,043 cells from the ﬂoor of the P1 cochlear duct were isolated
and analyzed (Fig. 1b, c, Supplementary Data 1).

With the exception of nine genes that were not
detected at all in the Burns et al. 4 study, all DE genes were more
highly expressed in the predicted cell types (Fig. 2m).

Lateral cochlear cells arise from a restricted progenitor pool.

o examine development of the lateral compartment of the OC
prior to OHC differentiation, single cells were collected from the
ﬂoor of the duct at E14 (4495 total) and E16 (7961 total; Sup-
plementary Data 1).

Localization of deafness genes in individual cell types. Average
levels of expression of known and potential deafness genes were
visualized within each cell type in the E14, E16, P1, and P7 data
sets (Fig. 7). This analysis served to both conﬁrm the quality of
the data set and also to localize candidate deafness genes to
speciﬁc cell types. Consistent with previous reports Myo6, Myo7a,
Myo3a, Cdh23, Pcdh15, Gipc3, and Cib2 (ref. 57 ) were primarily
expressed in HCs with many showing increased intensity of
expression as HCs mature (Fig. 7; arrows). Similarly, Gjb2 and
Gjb6 were most highly expressed in inner phalangeal cells and
cells within KO (ref. 58 ). Finally, we localized expression of genes
that have been linked to age, noise or cisplatin-related hearing
loss by GWAS but have not been studied extensively in the inner
ear (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/). Many of these genes were most
strongly expressed in HCs, but a few, such as Ccbe1 and St6gal-
nac5 showed speciﬁc expression in IPCs or Claudius cells,
respectively (Fig. 7; arrowheads).


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q94671498)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q94671498)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q94671498&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41467-020-16113-Y)  
