
Putative cell type discovery from single-cell gene expression data
==================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q95328107]  
  
Publication date : 18 of May, 2020  

# Highlights
Identifying cell types in multicellular organisms and understand-ing  the  relationships  between  them  has  been  a  major  aim  of  biological research since the discovery of cells by Robert Hooke almost 400 years ago.
By iteratively applying a machine learning approach to a given set of cells, we simultaneously identify distinct cell groups and a weighted list of feature genes for each group
Since the number of cell types in a new dataset is unknown a priori, methods to assess the likely number of clusters in data have been developed15 and distance-based cluster merging has been pro-posed  to  optimize  clustering.

We  treat  the  terms  ‘putative  cell  type’  and  ‘cell  state’  loosely  as  synonyms  referring  to  a  biologically  meaningful  group  of  cells  characterized by a specific pattern of gene expression.

--> Nice! Making the vagueness explicit.

 Our method, Single-Cell  Clustering  Assessment  Framework  (SCCAF)
on the iterative application of machine learning and self-projection14to  clusters,  thus  gradually  merging  clusters  that  can  be  defined  by  similar sets of feature genes.

The  validity  of  our  approach  is  based  on  three  assumptions.  First, as in any scRNA-seq approach, we assume that each putative cell  type  is  defined  by  a  specific  RNA  expression  profile.  Second,  we assume that the published, human expert-annotated scRNA-seq datasets  represent  the  ground  truth.  Third,  we  assume  that  if  an  automated  method  accurately  reconstructs  human  annotation  in  diverse scRNA-seq datasets, it will also probably work well on new datasets
 --> er

SCCAF  defines  cell  states  in  erythroid  maturation

The  erythrocytes  further  cluster  into  three  cell  states:  commit-ted  erythroid  progenitors  (CEP),  also  described  in  the  literature,  and early and late erythroid terminal differentiated cells (early and late  erythroid  terminal  differentiation), 

The t-SNE plots show that the optimized result is identical to an ideal annotation

--> Mixing a lot of different concepts

  some  cases,  manual  inspection  may  be  required  to  stop  cluster  merging.  When  ‘noisy  cells’  exist  in  the  initial  clustering,  SCCAF  merges  all  the  clusters  similar  to  these  ‘noisy  cells’  and  may  cause  underclustering  in  the  results.  Further  discussions  about  noisy  cells  and  underclustering  have been included in the Supplementary Notes.

  --> Might be intersesting discussions.

 One  can  argue  that  this  is  a  conse-quence  of  how  cell  types  are  currently  defined  in  the  context  of  scRNA-seq data (that is, via highly expressed marker genes), which is  also  consistent  with  how  scRNA-seq  data  is  usually  clustered  (either  based  on  highly  variable  genes  or  principal  components  in  expression space). It is an open question whether there is an alterna-tive biologically meaningful cell type definition (for instance, based on decision trees), for which nonlinear classifiers would outperform linear approaches. 

 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q95328107)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q95328107)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q95328107/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q95328107&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41592-020-0825-9)  
