
Ten tips for a text-mining-ready article: How to improve automated discoverability and interpretability
=======================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q96032351]  

# Highlights
We describe 10 straightforward writing tips—and a web tool, PubReCheck—guiding authors to help address the most common cases that remain difficult for text-mining tools
PubReCheck is available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/research/pubrecheck.

authors to become knowledgeable in terminologies and curation, which may not be practical. Another proposal is crowdsourcing, in which tasks are outsourced and distributed to many nonexpert workers online, typically by decomposing large tasks into individual decisions [27]. Despite progress, neither alternative has succeeded to date at a large scale.

-  clearly mention the relevant species when discussing genes or proteins whenever possible.

We recommend authors provide context that is critical for comprehension (such as identifying ambiguous concept names) prominently—in the abstract—and in proximity, preferably in the same sentence.

All abbreviations and acronyms be listed with the corresponding full term the first time they are used.

We recommend referring to concepts primarily by name; when a description is needed, we suggest providing both. (“orthostatic hypotension”) or with a description (“immediate drop in systolic blood pressure observed on standing”

choose a term for each concept and use it consistently

Some biomedical terms have multiple meanings and are therefore ambiguous, despite being commonly used in the literature. The term “yeast” often refers specifically to the model organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae, but there are over 1,500 known species of yeast

 We recommend that authors avoid creating coordinated compound terms with multiple potential interpretations.

Fig 2. Screenshot of the PubReCheck system using an artificial abstract.

PubReCheck identifies six types of biomedical concepts: genes, diseases, chemicals, genetic variants, species, and cell lines. PubReCheck also identifies six types of potential issues: misspellings, word spacing errors, undefined abbreviations, entities that cannot be uniquely identified, novel words, and unmatched parentheses.

Clearly mention the relevant species when discussing genes or proteins
Supply context critical for comprehension prominently and in proximity
Define abbreviations and acronyms the first time they are used
Refer to concepts primarily by name, not description
Choose a term for each concept and use it consistently
Prefer the complete and precise scientific term
Avoid creating complex coordinated compound terms
Recheck for word spacing errors
Verify parentheses and brackets are correctly paired
Recheck for misspellings using a different method

# Comments

It will be difficult to enforce, it is not clear what the incentives are for doing that.
