
Using Reactome to build an autophagy mechanism knowledgebase
============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q96120967]  
  
Publication date : 02 of June, 2020  

# Highlights

Here, we discuss the curation and annotation of the molecular mechanisms of autophagy in Reactome. We also demonstrate the value that Reactome adds to research by reanalyzing a previously published work on genome-wide CRISPR screening of autophagy components.

The major intracellular degradation system in eukaryotes, known as autophagy, is achieved by delivering unwanted cytoplasmic cargo to the lysosome for recycling.

To facilitate effective research, there is a need for a comprehensive and reliable resource that presents all the available information on autophagy mechanisms.

An overview of the curated information and annotated relations in Reactome and GO is shown in Table 1. Clearly, the schema of Reactome is more intricate and sophisticated than that of GO.

Following the previous example, in Reactome the MTOR protein is shown to participate in five reactions in the macroautophagy pathway as a part of five distinct complexes in the lysosomal lumen. Reactions describe the role of MTOR in ULK1 complex phosphorylation and GTP hydrolysis

Three common forms of autophagy are widely reported, namely macroautophagy (MA), chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA), and microautophagy (MI)
In alignment with this classification, we created three corresponding sub-pathways under autophagy.

(A) Systematic organization of sub-pathways and reactions (B) Overview of the pathway designed as fireworks-styled and Voronoi diagrams (C) Textbook-styled diagram of the process (D) Detailed molecular reactions presented in SBGN format

--> cool representation

The Reactome autophagy event hierarchy aligns well with the GO hierarchy of autophagy [4] (Table 2).

--> Could be connected to Wikidata...

Standard graphical representations: With some exceptions, Reactome follows the community standard Systems Biology Graphical Notation (SBGN) convention 

t is essential to access and analyze data in Reactome computationally. To this end, an application program interface (API) allows users to programmatically work with Reactome. The API is based on the Representational State Transfer (REST) protocol for efficient service and facilitates data retrieval via HTTP requests.

As an alternative representation, Reactome is available as a Neo4 j graph database. Users can intuitively interact with Reactome graph database in Neo4 j with the help of Cypher query language.

--> Nice! Reactome uses Neo4J, - 1.3.2.3. Bio2RDF and semantic databases

. Currently, we are working on an online reviewer system that will allow experts in the field to visit the website and review relevant curated information with minimal human interaction require
Novel discoveries in autophagy mechanisms can be incorporated in Reactome as they emerge. Users are free to use Reactome data (with citation) for research and publications as we have an open usage policy

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q96120967)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q96120967)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q96120967/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q96120967&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/15548627.2020.1761659)  
