
Benchmarking single-cell RNA-sequencing protocols for cell atlas projects
=========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q96230190]  
  
Publication date : 06 of April, 2020  

# Highlights

However, the protocols differ substantially with respect to their RNA capture efficiency, bias, scale and costs, and their relative advantages for different applications are unclear. In the present study, we generated benchmark datasets to systematically evaluate protocols in terms of their power to comprehensively describe cell types and states. We performed a multicenter study comparing 13 commonly used scRNA-seq and single-nucleus RNA-seq protocols applied to a heterogeneous reference sample resource. C

--> Good overview of protocols, for 1.4.2.1. Wet-lab methods and their differences

.  By  analyzing  human  periph-eral blood and mouse colon tissue, we have covered a broad range of  cell  types  and  states  from  cells  in  suspension  and  solid  tissues,  to represent common scenarios in cell atlas projects. 

 We  benchmarked  current  scRNA-seq  protocols  to  inform  the  methodological  selec-tion  process  of  cell  atlas  projects.  Ideally,  methods  should:  
 (1)  be  accurate  and  free  of  technical  biases,  
 (2)  be  applicable  across  dis-tinct cell properties, 
 (3) fully disclose tissue heterogeneity, including subtle differences in cell states, 
 (4) produce reproducible expression profiles,  
 (5)  comprehensively  detect  population  markers,  
 (6)  be  integratable with other methods and 
 (7) have predictive value with cells mapping confidently to a reference atlas.

 For  the  three  human  cell  types,  we  observed  a  broad  spectrum  of  correlation across technologies, with generally lower correlation for smaller  cell  types  (Fig.  3c). 


oint  analysis  across  datasets.  A  common  scenario  for  cell  atlas  projects  is  that  data  are  produced  at  different  sites  using  different  scRNA-seq  protocols.  However,  the  final  atlas  is  created  from  a  combination of datasets, which requires that the technologies used be  compatible.  To  assess  how  suitable  it  is  to  combine  the  results  from  our  protocols  into  a  joint  analysis,  we  used  down-sampled  human and mouse datasets to produce a joint quantification matrix for all techniques25. Importantly, single cells grouped themselves by cell type, suggesting that cell phenotypes are the main driver of het-erogeneity  in  the  joint  datasets  (Fig.  5a–d,  and  see  Supplementary  Figs. 19a,b and 20). Indeed, the combined data showed a clear sepa-ration of cell states (for example, T cell and enterocyte subpopula-tions) and rarer cell types, such as dendritic cells

technical effects that could not be entirely removed with down-sampling  to  equal  read  depth  and  different  merging  tools  (Fig. 5e,f, and see Supplementary Figs. 19c,d, 21a,b and 22a,b)

--> scRNA-seq, integration of different methods 1.1.2. Interoperable data: dataset integration

The use of PBMCs is ideal for multicenter benchmarking efforts; blood  cells  are  easy  to  isolate  and  show  a  high  recovery  rate  after  freezing. 

It is equally important to benchmark computational pipelines for data analysis and interpretation23,42–44. We envision the datasets pro-vided by our study serving as a valuable resource for the single-cell community to develop and evaluate new strategies for an informa-tive  and  interpretable  cell  atlas.  Moreover,  the  multicenter  bench-marking  framework  presented  in  the  present  study  can  readily  be  transferred  to  other  organs  where  common  tissue/cell  types  are  analyzed  using  different  scRNA-seq  protocols  (for  example,  brain  atlas projects).

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q96230190)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q96230190)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q96230190/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q96230190&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41587-020-0469-4)  
