
The network effect: studying COVID-19 pathology with the Human Cell Atlas
=========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q96817154]  

# Highlights

Viral infection and the response to it are events that initiate at the single- cell level, and many cell types, even those that do not express the molecular machinery needed for effective infection, may play key roles in viral pathology.

Moreover, because the data were generated using a variety of sample sources and lab protocols, the network had to devise a statistical meta- analysis approach — the first for any single- cell effort — to consolidate the data without requiring re- analysis of the results for each study

As we pool many datasets together and combine the expertise and critical input of many analysts, we can draw conclusions that may not be possible to achieve within a single lab.
# Comments

Also reviewed for https://github.com/greenelab/covid19-review

# Summary

### Suggested questions to answer about each paper:
- What did they analyze?

The authors review the efforts of the HCA to characterize cell types related to COVID-19 pathogenesis. 
They summarize the current discoveries on cell types that express ACE2. 

- What methods did they use?
- Does this paper study COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, or a related disease and/or virus?
Yes, COVID-19.

- What is the main finding (or a few main takeaways)?

  - ACE2 is expressed in a wide variety of cell types, including AT2 cells in the lung, but also gastrointestinal enterocytes, cardiomyocytes and others. 
  - The HCA project has many branches dedicated to study COVID-19 using single-cell RNA-seq

- What does this paper tell us about the background and/or diagnostics/therapeutics for COVID-19 / SARS-CoV-2?

  - Many cell types can be infected by SARS-CoV-2, which adds complexity for therapeutics.

- Do you have any concerns about methodology or the interpretation of these results beyond this analysis?

  - No. 

### Any comments or notes?

The paper is just a short (2 page) comment