
Quality Matters: Biocuration Experts on the Impact of Duplication and Other Data Quality Issues in Biological Databases
=======================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q97537095]  
  
Publication date : 08 of July, 2020  

# Highlights

Start-ing from individual laboratories, genomes are sequenced,assembled, annotated, and ultimately submitted to primarynucleotide databases such as GenBank[2], European Nucleo-tide Archive (ENA)[3], and DNA Data Bank of Japan(DDBJ)[4](collectively known as the International NucleotideSequence Database Collaboration, INSDC).

In our previous studies, we (Chen, Verspoor, and Zobel)explored a particular form of quality issue, which we charac-terized asduplication[24,25]. As described in these studies,duplicates are characterized in different ways in different con-texts, but they can be broadly categorized asredundanciesorinconsistencies. The perception of a pair of records as dupli-cates depends on the task. As we wrote in a previous study,‘‘a pragmatic definition for duplication is that a pair of recordsA and B are duplicates if the presence of A means that B isnot required, that is, B is redundant in the context of a specifictask or is superseded by A.”[24]

o address different quality issues, we introduce biocu-ration as a key mechanism for ensuring the quality of biolog-ical databases. To our knowledge, there is no one-size-fits-allsolution even to a single quality issue[27]

 Continuing with the UniProtKB example, the first stageprimarily concernsentity duplicates(often referred to astrueduplicates): records that correspond to the same biologicalentities regardless of whether there are differences in the con-tent of the database records. Merging such records into a sin-gle entry is the first step in UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot manualcuration[28]. The second stage primarily concernsnear-identi-cal duplicates(often referred to asredundant records): therecords may not refer to the same entities, but neverthelesshave a high similarity
he third stageprimarily concernsstudy-dependent duplicates:

In as early as 1996, Korning et al.[33]observed duplicates from the GenBankArabidopsis thalianadataset when curating these records. The duplicates were oftwo main types: the same genes that were submitted twice (ei-ther by the same or different submitters) and different genesfrom the same gene family that were similar enough so thatonly one was retained

Our approach integrates opinion-based and empirically-based approaches: the study presents opinions from domainexperts, but the data was gathered via a questionnaire; the sur-vey questions are provided in File S1.

The survey asked three primary questions about duplica-tion. (1)Whatare duplicates? We asked practitioners whatrecords they think should be regarded as duplicated. (2)Whycare about duplicates? We asked practitioners what impactduplicates have. (3)Howto manage duplicates? We askedpractitioners whether and how duplicates should be resolved.The details of questions and their possible responses are pro-vided below

In this study, we explore the perspectives of both databasemanagers and database users on the issue of data duplica-tion—one of several significant data quality issue

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q97537095)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q97537095)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q97537095/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q97537095&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.GPB.2018.11.006)  
