
Searching large-scale scRNA-seq databases via unbiased cell embedding with Cell BLAST
=====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q97529981]  

# Highlights

Herein, we present Cell BLAST, cell-querying method built on a neural network-based generative model and a cell-to-cell similarity metric.

Intuitively, low-dimensional embeddings of cells from the same cell type should reconstruct each other better than cells from different cell types. 

Our generative model combined with posterior-based similarity metric enables Cell BLAST to model the continuous spectrum of cell states more accurately.

Constructing a large-scale well-curated reference database.

A comprehensive and well-curated reference database is crucial for the practical application of Cell BLAST. 

Empirical case study shows that both the incorporation of hit similarity and ontology structure lead to improved Cell Ontology assignment.

Metadata were further manually curated by adding additional descriptions in the paper to acquire the most detailed information of each cell.

We unified raw cell type annotation by Cell Ontology. Closest Cell Ontology terms were manually assigned based on the Cell Ontology description and context of the study.

BLAST2CO can perform Cell Ontology (CL) inference for query cells as long as the reference datasets are annotated with Cell Ontology. For each CL existent in the hit cells, BLAST2CO calculates its confidence score by summing up the similarity of all hit cells belonging to the particular CL. The confidence scores are assigned to corresponding nodes in the CL graph, and then propagated to parent nodes along the graph.

If more than one CLs match the above conditions, the query cell is labeled as “ambiguous”. If no CL matches the above conditions, the query cell is labeled as “rejected.”

# Comments

"cell type resolution" is an interesting concept. 

Phrases like "All five ionocytes predicted as club cells by Cell BLAST are also agreed on by scmap." cast a shadow of doubt on the original annotations. 
"continuous spectrum of cell states more accurately."  Cell states are very explictly assumed to lie on a continuous spectrum. What about discrete states?

Annotation of cell types with Cell Ontology is strictly wrong (albeit being better than no annotatino at all). Annotates each single cell with a ranking of "terminal" cell types. 

The propagation of annotations is very useful. 

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q97529981)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q97529981)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q97529981/P921%3BP4510)  
