
Interpretable Clinical Genomics with a Likelihood Ratio Paradigm
================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q98208987]  
  
Publication date : 29 of July, 2020  

# Highlights

Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO)-based analysis has become standard for genomic diagnostics of rare diseases. Current algorithms use a variety of semantic and statistical approaches to prioritize the typically long lists of genes with candidate pathogenic variants.

Most current approaches use the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) for annotating the set of phenotypic abnormalities observed in the individual being investigated by whole-exome or whole-genome sequencing. The HPO contains 14,813 terms arranged as a directed acyclic graph in which edges represent subclass relations; 13,182 of these terms represent phenotypic abnormalities. For instance, Abnormal renal cortex morphology (HP:0011035) is a subclass of Abnormal renal morphology (HP:0012210)


For instance, Meckel syndrome type 7 is characterized by Patent ductus arteriosus (HP:0001643) with a frequency of two of seven affected individuals and Antenatal onset (HP:0030674).14

To test the performance of LIRICAL, we generated simulated data from 384 published case reports and leveraged data from 116 solved cases from the 100,000 Genomes Project. LIRICAL was highly accurate and robust to several sources of noise.

We use the pathogenicity score of the Exomiser, which calculates a score for any variant in the coding exome or at the highly conserved dinucleotide sequences at either end of introns

This heuristic means that if a ClinVar pathogenic variant is found even in a gene, such as TTN, that is characterized by a high frequency of predicted-pathogenic variants in the population, then this is taken as being supportive of a diagnosis associated with variants in the gene.

We curated HPO terms from 384 published case reports (Tables 1 and S2). We chose case reports in which the causative mutation had been identified so that we could perform simulations with and without a simulated exome.For each case report, we strove to capture all of the phenotypic features that were observed or explicitly excluded with corresponding HPO terms. The variants reported in the case reports were recorded via hg19 coordinates and checked via VariantValidator.3

384 phenopackets each describing a single published case report were derived from the literature by manual biocuration

LIRICAL is implemented as a stand-alone Java desktop application that can be installed in less than an hour.

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q98208987)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q98208987)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q98208987/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q98208987&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.AJHG.2020.06.021)  
