
High throughput error corrected Nanopore single cell transcriptome sequencing
=============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q98394753]  
  
Publication date : 12 of August, 2020  

# Highlights

e introduceScNaUmi-seq,  an  approach  that  combines  the  high  throughput  of  Oxford  Nanoporesequencing with an accurate cell barcode and UMI assignment strategy. UMI guided errorcorrection allows to generate high accuracy full length sequence information with the 10xGenomics single cell isolation system at high sequencing depths.

. Information crucial for an in-depth understanding ofcell-to-cell heterogeneity on splicing, chimeric transcripts andsequence diversity (SNPs, RNA editing, imprinting) is lacking.Long-read sequencing can overcome this limitation. Severalstudies used Pacific Biosciences (PacBio) or Nanopore long-readsequencing to obtain full-length single-cell data with the 10xGenomics Chromium system. Gupta et al.3reported PacBiosingle-cell sequencing of 6627 cells. However, due to the lowPacBio sequencing throughput, the sequencing depth was ratherlow (270 reads, 260 UMI, 129 genes per cell). Such a low depthlimits analysis to highly expressed transcripts. Oxford NanoporePromethION long-read sequencers generate 20 times more readsperflow cell than the PacBio Sequel II.

--> Cool, scRNA-seq combined with 3rd gen sequencing 

Our approach, entitledScNaUmi-seq(Single-cellNanopore sequencing with UMIs), enables the analysis of splicingand sequence variation at the single-cell level with the 10xGenomics Chromium system.

Yet,  high  accuracy  assignment  of  UMIs  to  long  reads  ischallenging and was not reported as for yet


 t-SNE plot of the Illumina short-read gene expression datareveals typical cell types for E18 mouse brain (Fig.2d). t-SNEprojection of transcript isoform expression defined by Nanoporesequencing (Fig.2e) yielded a similar clustering without revealingnovel  well-defined  sub-cluster

 Globally,  the  isoform-basedclustering was more diffuse than the gene-based clustering. Thisis likely due to: (i) a split of the UMIs for a given gene in a cellbetween several isoforms (16,612 genes vs. 33,002 isoforms) 

 We next examined how single-cell Nanopore sequencing with UMIs (ScNaUmi-seq) performs indefining SNVs for the ionotropic glutamate receptor Gria2, apost-synaptic cation channel that is A- > I edited at two sites,leading to a Q/R substitution within the pore that renders thechannel Ca2+impermeable and a R/G substitution within theligand-binding domain that results in accelerated recovery fromactivation

 --> Cool stuff

 In  conclusion,  ScNaUmi-seq  can  be  easily  plugged  intostandard single-cell sequencing workflows and should facilitatehigh throughput single-cell studies on RNA splicing, editing, andimprinting.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q98394753)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q98394753)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q98394753/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q98394753&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41467-020-17800-6)  
