
Single-Cell Sequencing of Peripheral Mononuclear Cells Reveals Distinct Immune Response Landscapes of COVID-19 and Influenza Patients
=====================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q98388192]  
  
Publication date : 19 of July, 2020  

# Highlights

COVID-19 and influenza are bothrespiratory infections with cytokinerelease syndrome. Zhu et al. use single-cell RNA sequencing of longitudinallycollected PBMCs in both patients toreveal distinct immune responselandscapes of the two diseases andidentify virus-specific cell compositionand immune response pathways.

Plasma cells increase significantly in both COVID-19 andinfluenza patients

We observed increase of plasma cells in bothCOVID-19 and IAV patients and XIAP associated factor 1 (XAF1)-, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-, and FAS-induced T cell apoptosis in COVID-19 patients.

(C) The clustering result of 46,022 cells from ten donors. Each point represents one single cell, colored according to cell type. Mega., Megakaryocyt

Here, we report the transcriptome dynamics of periph-eral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from patients withCOVID-19, comparing these to profiles in IAV patients and con-trol, healthy donors. 


o investigate the pathogenesis and mechanism of SARS-CoV-2infections in COVID-19 patients, blood samples were collectedfrom three healthy controls, two IAV-infected patients, and fiveCOVID-19 patients, including four patients (COV-1 to COV-4)with uncomplicated disease courses and one patient (COV-5)that subsequently progressed to severe disease (Figure 1A;Table S1). 

XCL+ NK cell

After filtering out cells with lowquality, we obtained transcriptome datasets from 46,022 cellswith an average of 2,000 cells for each participant at each timepoint (Figure 1B).

With this approach,five populations were annotated as T cells, including naive T cells(CD3+CCR7+GZMA), activated CD4+T cells (CD3+CD4+IL7R+),cytotoxic CD8+T cells (CD3+CD8+GZMA+), mucosal associatedinvariant T cells (MAIT cells; CD3+SLC4A10+), and cycling T cells (CD3+MKI67+); 

plasma cells(MZB1+IGHG1+), cycling plasma cells (MZB1+IGHG1+MKI67+)

two were annotatedas NK cells (KLRF1+); and one population was labeledDCs (CD1C+LYZ+) and monocytes (LYZ+CD68+)


Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in these transcriptomicprofiles were then compared between COVID-19 patients andhealthy controls.  were identified in patients infectedwith SARS-CoV-2 on D1 and D4 (Figures 3B andS3B), in linewith the enrichment for ‘‘response to type I IFN signaling’’ path-ways in our GO analysis (Figures 3A andS3A). 

For COVID-19 patients, STAT1, a major transcription factoractivated in response to interferon, was upregulated in activatedCD4+T cells, cytotoxic CD8+T cells, naive T cells, and DCs (Fig-ures 4A andS4A)

According to our results, upregulatedXAF1expression maybe involved in increased T cell apoptosis in COVID-19 patients,cooperating with other genes, includingIRF1,TP53,BCL2L11,andCASP3.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q98388192)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q98388192)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q98388192/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q98388192&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IMMUNI.2020.07.009)  
