
Immune-evasive human islet-like organoids ameliorate diabetes
=============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q98568692]  

# Highlights

Here we generate human islet-like organoids (HILOs) from induced pluripotent stem cells

With the goal of generating functional cells suitable for transplantation, we explored culture conditions designed to replicate the cellular architecture, as well as the cell-type diversity of islets. We initially exploited the cell-intrinsic abilities of human adipose-derived stem cells (hADSCs) and human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs)—which mimic pancreatic fibroblast and pan- creatic endothelial cells, respectively—to form organ-like and vascular structures when grown in three-dimensional (3D) cultures.

Comparative transcriptional analyses confirmed similar expressionof multiple key islet cell markers in WNT4-treated HILOs (wHILOs) and human islets, including β-cell-specific (NKX6-1, NEUROD1, RFX6, GCK, ISL1, SYT4 and PDX1) and α-cell-specific (ARX) genes

Fig. 2 | Exogenous PD-L1 expression extends wHILO functionality in immune-competent mice. a, Representative immunofluorescence staining for glucagon (GCG; α cell marker), somatostatin (SST; δ cell marker) and pancreatic polypeptide (PP; γ cell marker) in wHILOs.

--> Validated cell type structure via markers.

. Signature gene expression analyses fur- ther distinguished non-replicating and replicating ductal-endocrine bipotent cells (TOP2A±
), hormone-positive endocrine-enriched cells (GCG+ or SST+ ), ductal-like cells (KRT19+), and a small population of cells with unknown function (Extended Data Fig. 8e, f)

--> Immediate linking of markers with function. A population without a name is assumed to correspond to an "essential" cell type, existent and of unknown function.



# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q98568692)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q98568692)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q98568692/P921%3BP4510)  
