
A single-cell transcriptome atlas of marsupial embryogenesis and X inactivation
===============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q98568691]  

# Highlights

Here we perform a single-cell RNA-sequencing analysis of embryogenesis and X chromosome inactivation in a marsupial, the grey short-tailed opossum (Monodelphis domestica)

single cells collected at E3.5–E7.5 segregated into clusters according to their developmental age. Oocytes and single cells at E1.5 and E2.5 formed a single cluster that was transcriptionally distinct from most cells at E3.5

--> Stage-dependent cell types! Interesting that any timing can provide a valid strictu-sensu cell type by all rules but the usefulness. A E3.1234 stage would be too specific to be useful.

To identify markers of EPI, PrE and TE that
are conserved between eutherians and marsupials, we compared our opossum scRNA-seq datasets to those that have recently been derived from mouse embryos at E4.5–E6.5, cynomolgus macaque (Macaca fascicularis) embryos at E6–E9 and human embryos at E5–E716,41,42
.

--> "Conserved markers" means that the genes are conserved both at the nucleotide level and the expression pattern level. Which kind of implies homologous tissues and/or cell types. 


We find that lineage divergence in the opos- sum initiates late in development. It has previously been suggested52 that, in eutherians, lineage divergence to generate the TE and pluri- blast (the progenitor of the EPI and PrE) occurs precociously because implantation in these mammals occurs early. Our findings support this view. Whether a pluriblast exists in the opossum remains an open question, which we discuss further in Supplementary Information 9.

--> Nice mention of what we do not know.





# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q98568691)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q98568691)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q98568691/P921%3BP4510)  
