
Evolution of Cellular Differentiation: From Hypotheses to Models
================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q98633613]  

# Highlights

The evolution of multicellularity is a major evolutionary transition that allowed for the increase of organismal complexity in multiple lineages, a process that relies on the functional integration of cell-types within an individual. Multiple hy- potheses have been proposed to explain the origins of cellular differentiation, but we lack a general understanding of what makes one cell-type distinct from others, and how such differentiation arises. Here, we describe how the use of Boolean networks (BNs) can aid in placing empirical findings into a coherent conceptual framework, and we emphasize some of the standing problems when interpreting data and model behaviors.


Cell types can evolve via different mechanisms, including ecological con- text, genomic innovation, cooperative integration, or a combination of these.
Studying cell types in multicellular organ- isms has been recently enhanced by new technologies that allow for single- cell profiling.
Despite these advances, the interpreta- tion of data and the concept of ‘cell types’ remain ambiguous.
New theoretical work is needed to put the empirical and conceptual advances into a coherent framework.
Boolean networks are models that can bridge the conceptual and theoretical is- sues with the empirical findings


Clonal multicellular organisms develop from a single-cell bottleneck (A) and, thus, the cells within the fully developed organism have the same genetic identity (they are ‘clones’). By contrast, aggregative multicellular organisms develop via aggregation of individual cells (B).

The fact that multiple cell-types exist within unicellular and aggregative organisms suggests that the origin of cellular differentiation is largely independent of the route to multicellularity [14,15]. Thus, the task at hand becomes finding an explanation for cell differentiation in any given multicellular context, being clonal or aggregative, without conflating explanations for multicellular evolution itself.


What Counts as a Cell Type? A meaningful explanation of the evolution of cell types requires de minimus a clear and canonical definition of what counts as a ‘cell-type’.At first glance, it would appear that cell types differ in terms of either their morphology or function, or both. Surprisingly, however, there is no general agree- ment on the extent to which morphological or functional divergence is required to identify a particular type of cell as different from other types, and the answers largely depend on the particular organism of interest, or a given method of classification.


Figure I. The Size–Complexity Rule. It has been proposed that the size of an organism scales with its complexity. In this context, an approximation for complexity is the number of cell-types within a given organism. This conceptualization is supported by a large body of evidence, as shown in this plot, which highlights some representative multicellular groups, from simple to complex for example, the slime mold (Dictyostelium discoideum), green algae (Gonium viridistellatum), land plants (Fuirena ciliaris), mouse (Mus musculus), and dogs (Canis familiaris). Adapted from data in [5]

--> Lol, how can such a figure be made without a clear definition of cell type?? Also, I would argue that Plasmodium sp are single-celled but have multiple cell types!


dvances in molecular evalua- tions of cell-types have not been matched with equal advances in the theoretical or conceptual tools required to identify the thresholds that must be crossed for a particular cell to be classified as morphologically, physiologically, or functionally different from any other [22,24]. Nevertheless, amid the lack of conceptual clarity about what constitutes a cell-type is a recent framework by Arendt et al. that aims to distinguish cell-types within and between species [25]

--> I do not recall a focus on the within/between distinctions on Arendts work

Moreover, this heterogeneity often comes from ‘hidden variables’ that cannot be directly accessed from the data themselves, making it hard to ascribe explanations to such variation [29]. Another source of disconnect between data and theory arises in the opposite extreme, a continuum of behaviors wherein variation sits on a ‘continuous manifold’ that is hard to partition precisely because it does not look suitable for discretization [30].


--> "does not look suitable for discretization" is really a matter of why one wants to discretize. 

For example, is each data cluster a true ‘cell–type', or could they be snapshots of the dynamics of a single type? The opposite question also emerges: could different cell types be misassigned to the same cluster simply because they happen to have partially overlapping dynamics?

--> Gosh, we need a definition of cell type to discuss this kind of things.

BNs are abstract constructs used to model cell differentiation without referring to a particular biological system [41]. One advantage of this discrete approach is that it allows one to ask con- crete theoretical questions without focusing on the diverse details of a real biological system, which is required in most continuous models (e.g., with the use of differential equations), where empirically verified rate constants are usually necessary. Instead of considering the details of a system, BNs focus on the logic of the interactions between the components of the systems. Although they might appear abstract at first glance, BN models have been used to accurately model cellular differentiation in numerous systems, including plants, flies, yeast, humans, andmany other kinds of organism (e.g., [42–47]). Thus, the Boolean framework allows one to pose specific questions and to test specific hypotheses in an intuitive way without losing power or generality (e.g., [48,49]). So far, no other model of cellular differentiation has the same advantages.


--> Well, it seems like a knowledge-graph like approach!

Life-Cycle Integration A recent hypothesis is that cell differentiation can emerge through the integration of the functionally distinct life stages of a unicellular organism (Figure IC). This hypothesis has been called ‘temporal to spatial’ evolution of cell differentiation [4,95], and stems from the fact that single-celled organisms can undergo various forms of differentiation though their life stages, as in Dictyostelium and some bacteria [16,62,96,97]. This hypothesis can be related to the idea of ‘ecological scaffolding’ [98] and symbiotic interactions [99].
Dynamical


ABN can model the phenotypic dynamics of cells by representing their genes (or any other relevant entity) as binary variables representing their activation (ON state) or inactivation (OFF state), along with their interactions inside the cell (A). The interactions between genes determine the behavior of the entire network over time (the dynamics), which is meant to represent the change of cell behavior.


For example, Mendoza [53] used BNs to model the differentiation process in T helper (Th) cells, recovering attractors representing faithfully the different Th cell types (Th0, Th1, and Th2).


For some researchers, it might appear that the lack of rate constants in BNs is a fundamental lim- itation when matching empirical studies on molecular dynamics (as explained in [66]). However, the classification of cellular behaviors as distinct ‘types’ is ultimately a qualitative distinction and, thus, BN models appear apt for this task

In essence, this work has been hampered by important conceptual lim- itations, such as the lack of precise and biologically accurate definitions of key concepts (e.g., what is a ‘cell type’), and the ambiguities that often result when trying to solve philosophical issues via data analysis.

Therefore, it is crucial that future research develops a dynamic reciprocity between theorists and empiricists, because only then will we be able to break current constraints on our ability to reveal deep insights into the fundamental question of how cells differentiate.

# Comments

Interesting use of glossary.


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q98633613)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q98633613)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q98633613/P921%3BP4510)  
