
Transcription factor expression defines subclasses of developing projection neurons highly similar to single-cell RNA-seq subtypes
==================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q99571943]  
  
Publication date : 18 of September, 2020  

# Highlights

Here, we deeply characterize differential gene expression and chromatin accessibility of UL and DL neurons. We identify TFs that are highly differentially expressed and densely regulated and find that UL neurons retain the transcriptomic signature of their mother cells
. We also describe transcription factor-adjacent long noncoding RNAs that define each subclass and validate the function of Myt1l in balancing the ratio of the two subclasses in vitro. Our multidimensional approach supports an evolving model of progressive restriction of cell fate competence through inherited transcriptional identities.

The majority of DL neurons, for example, are corticofugal projection neurons (CFPNs), 

Cell Subclass Is the Greatest Source of Variability in Gene Expression.
DL projection neurons (DL subclass, layers 5 and 6) 

 UL-like transcripts may represent a common Ptn+ CPN population, given that Mpped1 is expressed in 6 of 10 SPLiT-seq types, while DL-subset transcripts may represent L5/6 Sox5−, Tle4−, Npr3+ cells (Fig. 2H).

This is underscored by knowledge graphs such as Wikidata [24], The generated dataset contains 10 million papers or 100 million nodes. We tested the system with variable numbers of papers and the average response time to fetch a single paper with its related research contribution is 60 ms. This suggests that the infrastructure can handle large amounts of scholarly knowledge.

This article described the first steps of a larger research and development agenda that aims to enhance  document-based scholarly communication with semantic representations of communicated scholarly knowledge.

# Comments

## Tags
    - 1.1.3. Interoperable publication processes (nanopublications) 

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q99571943)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q99571943)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q99571943&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/PNAS.2008013117)  
