
Northstar enables automatic classification of known and novel cell types from tumor samples
===========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q99564826]  

# Highlights
Published algorithms for automatic cell annotation are limited to known cell types and fail to capture novel populations, especially cancer cells. We developed northstar, a computational approach to classify thousands of cells based on published data within seconds while simultaneously identifying and highlighting new cell states such as malignancies.

We collected eleven pancreatic tumors and identified three shared and five private neoplastic cell populations, offering insight into the origins of neuroendocrine and exocrine tumors. Northstar is a useful tool to assign known and novel cell type and states in the age of cell atlases.

Although many kinds of analyses are possible after harmonization, many biomedical researchers are most interested in cell type annotation, i.e. the assignment of each new cell into a known cell type or novel cluster. Perhaps surprisingly, no software tool is specifically designed to assign cells to known types while clustering the unassigned cells into novel clusters.

--> "Cell annotation" is a good, accurate vocab

If atlas cells from two distinct types get clus- tered together—which can happen routinely in practice—classifying the new cells becomes a very confusing task.
An alternative approach, shared by scClassify17 and scmapCluster (part of scmap) is to either assign new cells
to a known type or reject them into an “unknown” bin.

These issues share a common origin: the clustering algorithm is unaware of the cell atlas annotations. To
address this issue, we have developed northstar, an algorithm and software package that classifies single-cell transcriptomes guided by training data but is also able to discover new cell types or cell states

The unique feature of northstar is that every new cell can be either assigned to either a known atlas cell type or a novel cluster. An implementation in C++/Python is available at https ://githu b.com/north stara tlas/north star and preprocessed atlases for immedi- ate use are available at https ://north stara tlas.githu b.io/atlas _landmarks.

The unique feature of northstar is that every new cell can be either assigned to either a known atlas cell type or a novel cluster. An implementation in C++/Python is available at https ://githu b.com/north stara tlas/north star and preprocessed atlases for immedi- ate use are available at https ://north stara tlas.githu b.io/atlas _landm arks.

northstar assigned natural killer (NK) cells, one of the four cell types removed from the atlas, to T cells, a transcriptionally similar cell type that was still present in the atlas. An analogous mistake led to misclassification of capillary endothelial cells as fenestrated cells and to the merging of fibroblasts and mesangial cells—both mesenchymal cells—into the same novel cluster (14). Northstar misclas- sified a small number of cells to an unrelated cell type (red dots).


--> That all sounds very essentialistic, sounds like cell types were created by God as an essential part of every human being.

Geometric subsampling of the atlas29, followed by merging with the new data and unsupervised clustering is a viable route, however known cell types can split into subclusters or merge into superclusters, greatly complicating the interpretation. In our experience such cases happen often because clustering can be performed at different resolutions leading to equally valid classifications (e.g. all immune cells, lymphocytes, T cells). Northstar improves over these approaches by combining cell-type aware subsampling of the atlas at the desired clustering resolution with an atlas-aware clustering algorithm16. Known cell types can neither split nor merge simply because they are fully determined by the atlas.

--> A cell types is "fully determined by the atlas". What does determination mean?

Northstar is efficient because it approximates a cell atlas by compressed representations, i.e. averages or small
subsamples. One can easily use an atlas with millions of cells on a laptop with 16 GB of RAM as long as the number of cell types remains within a few hundreds. Current atlases only have tens (Figs. 2, 3, 4) of cell types and the current gain is 5 new cell types per tenfold increase in cell numbers (Fig. 1E).

Unfortunately, many cell atlases are poorly disseminated. Data access is idiosyncratic to each dataset and
often requires manual steps (e.g. writing emails to the authors). Cell type annotations are difficult to find and often of mediocre quality, presenting a challenge in particular to algorithms such as scClassify that rely on entire cell type hierarchies17. Although northstar is less affected because it does not require a hierarchical ontology, we aspire to change this trend by providing a website with averages and subsamples for several atlases that can be accessed both by humans and programmatically: https ://north stara tlas.githu b.io/atlas _landm arks. This makes it easy to combine atlases and cherry pick different cell types from each to maximize the leverage provided by the annotations. Contributions and requests are welcome.

--> wow, they see an ontology-based classification as a down-side. That is weird. 

# Comments

Still, based on "expert annotation" of reference datasets.

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q99564826)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q99564826)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q99564826/P921%3BP4510)  
