
Dental cell type atlas reveals stem and differentiated cell types in mouse and human teeth
==========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q99616616]  

# Highlights

Understanding cell types and mechanisms of dental growth is essential for reconstruction and engineering of teeth.

we report an unappreciated cellular complexity of the continuously-growing mouse incisor, which suggests a coherent model of cell dynamics enabling unarrested growth.

Despite being similar at a coarse level, mouse and human teeth reveal molecular differences and species-specific cell subtypes suggesting possible evolutionary divergence.

--> Nice to explicit acknowledge that.

Even though major tooth cell types have long been identified, the spectrum of rare and transient cell populations and interactions that enable tooth growth remain poorly understood.

All general cell types show considerable degree of internal heterogeneity (Supplementary Figs. 1e–g, i, 3) empha- sizing complexity of interactions and physiological processes

Fig. 1 Unbiased identification, validation, and spatial mapping of major dental cell types and subpopulations
Validations and mapping of unbiasedly identified populations based on the expression of selected marker genes. All validations were performed by immunohistochemistry except of alveolar bone panel where DSPPcerulean/DMP1Cherry mice was used (only red channel showed). Note. SOX9 is well-known marker for pulp cells, COL4 for blood vessels, CDH1 for epithelium, and ACTA2 for dental follicle (and perivascular cells). All these marker genes are highly and specifically expressed in corresponding clusters (Supplementary Table 1), but do not belong to top10 genes shown in plots above the images. (LiCL Lingual Cervical Loop, LaCL Labial Cervical Loop, SI Stratum Intermedium, SR Stellate reticulum, OEE Outer Enamel Epithelium). Scare bars: 50 µm

--> Very nice figure.

we observed spatially separated stages of ameloblast differentiation, including pre- ameloblasts (Shh+ cluster 11), secretory (Enam+ cluster 5), maturation (Klk4+ cluster 10) and postmaturation (Gm17660+ cluster 6) stages (Fig.

Fig. 3 Identification of previously unrecognized cell types in dental epithelium and stem cells. a–e In situ hybridization (Igfbp5, Gjb3) and immunohistochemistry (PIEZO2, EGR1, and CLDN10) validations of selected markers demarcating different progenitor and differentiated states in epithelial layer. Note: Validation of expression of Igfbp5 enables identification of outer enamel epithelium clusters on a t-SNE representation

Obtaining cells of odontoblast sublineage became possible because we enriched for it by using Dsppcerulean/Dmp1Cherry transgenic animals.

lthough the mouse incisor stands as a model for a growing tooth, molecular features that distinguish it from non- growing teeth remain unexplored. Therefore, we generated single- cell transcriptional snapshots of a nongrowing adult mouse molar

molar pulp appeared significantly more homogeneous as compared to the pulpal populations of the incisor given the resolution of the current measurements.

To determine the extent to which the observed pulp contrast between growing and nongrowing teeth in mouse reflects human biology, we conducted single-cell profiling of 39,095 cells from healthy nongrowing and growing wisdom teeth in humans (Figs. 8, 9).

--> Nice cross species comparison!

The analysis revealed that human teeth contain cell types ana- logous to those in mice, including vascular and perivascular cells, glia and immune populations, and distinct subpopulations of pulp cells (Figs. 8a–d, 9a, b)

--> "Analogous cell types", yes! Precise terminology. Also, consistency in refering to species-specific cell types.

b Characterization of cell composition across five adult and two growing human molars using scVI deep learning framework. UMAP dimensionality reduction visualizes similarity of expression profiles of 39,095 single cells. Colors correspond to individual datasets and indicate clustering by cell types

--> Nice viz of interindividual diversity.

The lineage tracing experiments presented here or published by other authors never showed the entire population of ameloblasts to be traced. Instead, the epithelial progeny appears in characteristic patches, supporting the diver- sity of epithelial stem cells. Furthermore, we identified Egr1+ long-lasting epithelial progenitors, which appeared to be similar to a concept of short-living stem cells. Thus, the progenitor area might rely on functional diversification of different stem cells with a stemness gradation. Such diversity of epithelial progenitor cell subtypes might also reflect the remarkable plasticity noted by earlier studies35,46


Overall, we hope that the presented detailed and validated map
of dental cell types, supplemented by human comparison, will serve as a key resource stimulating further studies of cell dynamics in tooth morphogenesis, also including reparative and regenerative therapies.

# Comments

I like very much the notes taken in the article.

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q99616616)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q99616616)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q99616616/P921%3BP4510)  
