
Cells of the adult human heart
==============================
  
  [@wikidata:Q99708572]  
  
Publication date : 24 of September, 2020  

# Highlights

 Here, using state-of-the-art analyses of large-scale single-cell and
single-nucleus transcriptomes, we characterize six anatomical adult heart regions.
Our results highlight the cellular heterogeneity of cardiomyocytes, pericytes and
fbroblasts, and reveal distinct atrial and ventricular subsets of cells with diverse
developmental origins and specialized properties.

We present comprehensive transcriptomic data on six distinct cardiac regions, providing, to our knowledge, the largest reference framework so far


Fig. 1 | Cell composition of the adult human heart.  c, Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) embedding
of 487,106 cells and nuclei delineate 11 cardiac cell types and marker genes. 

--> Markers will go to Wikidata now. Are these markers heart specific? Or are they valid for these cells anywhere? These is essentially subspecified and interpretative. Good case for 2.4.4. A pragmatic definition of cell type and discussions on 3.1. Cell-type markers in Wikidata. 

--> Added in batch: https://quickstatements.toolforge.org/#/batch/49644


We identify five ventricular cardiomyocyte (vCM1–vCM5) populations

--> Parece forçado, UMAP tá todo junto...

We define a distinct small population as mesothelial cells that enrich
for MSLN, WT1 and BNC141 but lack EC, FB or mural genes. smFISH  confirms this annotation with localization of BNC1+
/CDH5− cells to the epicardium (Extended Data Fig. 4l–n).

Fig. 4 | Cardiac immune populations and cell–cell interactions.

--> Nice little pops for Wikidata. Cool infographics.

 Gene
expression signature for cardiac-specific LYVE1+
 macrophages compared
against predicted matched populations in skeletal muscle and kidney

--> Further emphasizing the need of tissue-specificity in the definition of cell types.

Analysis of cardiac immune cells reveals 21 cell states (Fig. 4a, Extended
Data Fig. 7). Myeloid cells comprise 13 populations, including several
subtypes of macrophages, monocytes and dendritic cells, whereas the
lymphoid compartment comprises 8 populations (Supplementary
Tables 14, 15).

--> States as a general term (that includes "populations" and cell "subtypes")

We define cells enriched for genes from 12 cardiovascular
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and involved in SARS-CoV-2
infection using MAGMA.

--> covidomics



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q99708572)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q99708572)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q99708572/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Cells%20of%20the%20adult%20human%20heart'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
