
Ten simple rules for making training materials FAIR
===================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q100158863]  
  
Publication date : 01 of May, 2020  

# Highlights
 Rather than starting from scratch, however, it’s sometimes possible to repurpose materials that already exist. Yet finding suitable materials online can be difficult: They’re often widely scattered across the internet or hidden in their home institutions, with no systematic way to find them. This is a common problem for all digital objects. The scientific community has attempted to address this issue by developing a set of rules (which have been called the Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable [FAIR] principles) to make such objects more findable and reusable. Here, we show how to apply these rules to help make training materials easier to find, (re)use, and adapt, for the benefit of all.

Within the European life sciences infrastructure for biological information (ELIXIR) [10], the Training Platform [11] is collecting and sharing information about training materials from 23 participating European nodes via the Training e-Support System (TeSS) [12]. As part of that process, we are exploring the application of the FAIR principles to those materials, in order to improve their (re)usability.


Rule 2: Improve findability of your training materials by properly describing them
Schema.org [18] is a collaborative project that facilitates the addition of structured metadata to web pages. 

BioSchemas [19], a community initiative to extend the Schema.org standard to life-science resources, includes a specification for TrainingMaterial [20].
Creative Commons (CC) licenses can be applied to give authors and users appropriate rights of (re)use [46]. It is important to state clearly which license has been chosen and to include information on how the material can be cited, as part of the material’s metadata.

Let these be the first steps towards a paradigm shift in providing FAIR training and education for current and future generations.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q100158863)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q100158863)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q100158863&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/JOURNAL.PCBI.1007854)  
