
The Functionally Unannotated Proteome of Human Male Tissues: A Shared Resource to Uncover New Protein Functions Associated with Reproductive Biology
====================================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q100676469]  
  
Publication date : 16 of October, 2020  

# Highlights

In the context of the Human Proteome Project, we built an inventory of 412 functionally unannotated human proteins for which experimental evidence at the protein level exists (uPE1) and which are highly expressed in tissues involved in human male reproduction

--> Cool

https://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/acs.jproteome.0c00516

In addition, neXtProt provides a
“protein existence” (PE) status to each entry, which indicates
the type of evidence that supports the existence of the protein.
The value “Experimental evidence at protein level” (PE1)
indicates that there is clear experimental evidence for the
existence of at least one proteoform in the entry. The value
“Experimental evidence at transcript level” (PE2) indicates that
the existence of a protein has not been proven but that
expression data indicate the existence of a transcript. The value
“Protein inferred by homology” (PE3) indicates that the
existence of a protein is probable because clear orthologs exist
in closely related species. The value “Protein predicted” (PE4)
is used for entries without evidence at protein, transcript, or
homology levels. Finally, the value “Protein uncertain” (PE5)
indicates that the existence of the protein is unsure and that it
most probably corresponds to an incorrect in silico translation
of a noncoding element

In
the present study we established an inventory of 412 uPE1
proteins enriched in the male reproductive system by collating
information (e.g., experimental data, annotation, facts from
literature) from publicly available resources. 


Briefly, the
core proteome of the human male reproductive system was
built using the Human Protein Atlas (HPA) database by
selecting genes/proteins flagged as “elevated” in at least one of
the five human male tissues available. These tissues are testis,
epididymis, ductus deferens, seminal vesicle, and prostate
(Figure 2). This set of 2714 entries was compared to the
unknown proteome and the latest release of the missing
proteome (February 2020, SPARQL query NXQ_00204)
enabling to select 412 protein entries which are PE1 with no
function annotation (Figure 3).

--> Cool applied curation project.

 Then we performed a survey
literature and identified five uPE1 (TEX33, CCDC38,
CFAP70, CFAP58, C3orf62 and ANKDR55) for which a
functional role was recently reported (Table 1)

How to prioritize these proteins and upon which criteria for
a wet biologist is a nontrivial question. Most testicular proteins
with unknown function are expressed in the germ cell lineage,
and it may be difficult for scientists other than those with
extensive experience on spermatogenesis to access the relevant
biological samples for further characterization of uPE1.


# Comments

Super closed access, not cool



## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q100676469)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q100676469)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q100676469/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q100676469&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1021/ACS.JPROTEOME.0C00516)  
