
Capillary cell-type specialization in the alveolus
==================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q100560109]  

# Highlights

We show that alveolar capillaries are mosaics; similar to the epithelium that lines the alveolus, the alveolar endothelium is made up of two intermingled cell types, with complex ‘Swiss-cheese’- like morphologies and distinct functions. The first cell type, which we term the ‘aerocyte’, is specialized for gas exchange and the trafficking of leukocytes, and is unique to the lung. The other cell type, termed gCap (‘general’ capillary), is specialized to regulate vasomotor tone, and functions as a stem/progenitor cell in capillary homeostasis and repair. The two cell types develop from bipotent progenitors, mature gradually and are affected differently in disease and during ageing. This cell-type specialization is conserved between mouse and human lungs but is not found in alligator or turtle lungs, suggesting it arose during the evolution of the mammalian lung.

To test whether the capillary populations are stable cell types or interconverting cell states, we used complementary genetic strategies to permanently label each subset (using either Apln-creER or Aplnr-creER) and analysed the expression of subset markers in labelled cells after 48 hours, 1 month or 6 months to determine whether the labelled popu- lation continues to express the markers, or whether cells turn them off and start to express markers of the other population. We found minimal (0.2% at 6 months) interconversion (Fig. 1h, i, Extended Data Fig. 1k–n), indicating that the populations are not transient cell states. We conclude that the alveolar capillary network is composed of two intermingled, stable cell types, which we call gCap (general capillary cells) and aCap (aerocytes; see below).

--> Nice take, directly looking at splitting "type" and "state"

aCap cells are complex, large cells (spanning more than 100 μm; 21 × 103 μm3 mean volume) with ramified extensions that surround pores (mean of 6 pores per cell, range 2–9), giving cells the appearance of Swiss cheese.

--> Nice description, albeit no _definition_ per se


c, Heat map of expression of capillary subset markers and the general endothelial marker Cldn5 in individual capillary cells. CPM, counts per million.

Fig. 2 | Specialized alveolar capillary cell types in gas exchange and capillary renewal. a, b, Single aCap (aerocyte) (a) or gCap (b) cells in adult Apln-creER; Rosa26-Confetti (a) or Aplnr-creER; Rosa26-Confetti (b)

To look for differences in the localization of the cell types in these structurally distinct regions, we performed immuno-electron microscopy on lungs in which aCap and gCap cells were separately labelled.
Thick and thin regions of the air–blood barrier. g–i, Apln-creER; Rosa26-tdTomato (g, h) or Aplnr-creER; Rosa26-tdTomato (i) lungs immunostained for tdTomato (heavy black stain

--> Now we have a gene-based, implicit definition

Because of their close association with AT1 cells within thin regions of the respiratory surface (Fig. 2k) and their expansive morphology, which reflects a specialized role in gas exchange analogous to AT1 cells, we term aCap cells ‘aerocytes.’

We found only a small num- ber of genes (Scn7a, Mapt) that were expressed by all (or most), and only, alveolar capillary cells, suggesting that few if any molecular func- tions are carried out by both capillary cell types but not by other lung endothelial cells


Fig. 4 k, Heat map of expression of cell-type markers in individual human capillary cells16.

--> Where is APLNRB?!

r, Co-expression (asterisks) of the mammalian alveolar capillary cell-type markers EDNRB (aCap) and APLNR (gCap) in faveolar capillary cells (CLDN5, white) in alligator lung. Blue,

--> Nice taxon restriction testing. But how is the archetype defined?


Aerocytes first emerge at embryonic day (E)17.5 and begin to acquire their Swiss-cheese-like morphology during embryonic development
(Fig. 4g, h, Extended Data Figs. 2, 6g, h)

--> So they are aerocytes even before they acquire the Swiss-cheese-like morphology.

We identified both cell types intermingled within human alveolar cap- illary networks (Fig. 4j, k, Extended Data Fig. 8a–i, Supplementary Video 5), indicating these cell types have been conserved in mammalian evolution.

Our analysis suggests that some cell-type-specific functions are
conserved between mice and humans. For example, specialized leukocyte-trafficking genes are restricted to aerocytes, and gCap cells may regulate vasomotor tone in both species (Fig. 4m, Extended Data Fig. 10a–c). But capillary cell types can also gain (or lose) functions: in mice, gCap cells preferentially express MHC class II genes, whereas in humans, these genes are expressed by aerocytes (Fig. 4o, Extended Data Fig. 10a, b, e).
Evolution

# Comments

It looks like there is a "natural" hidden subpopulation os gCap cells, both per the Fig. 1 tSNE plot and the heatmap

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q100560109)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q100560109)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q100560109/P921%3BP4510)  
