
The cellular basis of distinct thirst modalities
================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q100560052]  
  
Publication date : 14 of October, 2020  

# Highlights

. However, how different thirst modalities are encoded in the brain remains unknown. Here we employed stimulus-to-cell-type mapping using single-cell RNA sequencing to identify the cellular substrates that underlie distinct types of thirst. These studies revealed diverse types of excitatory and inhibitory neuron in each circumventricular organ structure. We show that unique combinations of these neuron types are activated under osmotic and hypovolaemic stresses


Peripheral sensory systems such as taste and olfaction can detect multiple stimuli through unique cell types.

We next asked whether osmotic and hypovolaemic stresses are detected by the same neurons in the CVOs. To test this, we employed an activity-dependent genetic labelling strategy in which FOS-positive neurons can be permanently labelled (TRAP213; Extended Data Fig. 1d)

--> Nice, I remember this

 For example, both the SFO and the OVLT harbour a specialized endothelial cell class that is labelled by the expression of Plvap (Extended Data


These analyses revealed 12 and 13 major cell classes in the SFO and the OVLT, respectively (Fig. 2a, b, Extended Data Fig. 2a–d). Notably, we found a few uncommon cell types present in CVOs. For example, both the SFO and the OVLT harbour a specialized endothelial cell class that is labelled by the expression of Plvap (Extended Data Fig. 2a, b

. Moreover, both CVOs contain a specialized LT astrocyte class labelled by Ucma (Extended Data Fig. 2a–d).

In accord-ance with previous findings, all SFO excitatory neurons and five of six OVLT excitatory neurons expressed Etv1, a genetic marker that labels dehydration-sensitive neurons


To identify specific cell types involved in distinct thirst modalities, we functionally mapped thirst-activated neurons using immediate early gene (IEG) expression21,22. To this end, we developed and optimized a 10× Chromium-based stimulus-to-cell-type mapping approach. 

ne excitatory neuron type in each structure (SFO: Glut1–Htr7; OVLT: Glut1–Bmp3) was robustly activated under hypovolaemic, but not under osmotic, thirs

These analyses found that expression of Rxfp1 and Pdynstrongly correlated with neural activation patterns under osmotic and hypovolaemic thirst, respectively 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q100560052)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q100560052)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q100560052/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q100560052&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-020-2821-8)  
