
Exploring Manually Curated Annotations of Intrinsically Disordered Proteins with DisProt
========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q100444216]  
  
Publication date : 01 of December, 2020  

# Highlights

A growing number of scientific studies have been published during the last few decades in an effort to shed light on their unstructured state, their binding modes, and their functions. DisProt makes use of a team of expert biocurators to provide up-to-date annotations of intrinsically disordered proteins from the literature, making them available to the scientific community. 

DisProt is the major repository of manually curated data for intrinsically disordered proteins collected from the literature.


We describe how to search DisProt annotations, using both the web interface and the API
for programmatic access. Finally, we explain how to visualize and interpret
a DisProt entry, p53, a widely studied protein characterized by the presence
of unstructured N-terminal and C-terminal regions. © 2020 Wiley Periodicals
LLC.

Strikingly, some of the most well characterized and crucial functions of
IDPs arise from their flexible nature: they can be flexible linkers connecting structured
domains of a protein, or they can act as entropic clocks, bristles, and springs due to their
entropic features (Tompa, 2009; Uversky & Dunker, 2010).

The IDP ontology (https:// disprot.org/ about) includes four main branches,
corresponding to the four disorder aspects annotated in DisProt: structural state, struc-
tural transition, interaction partner, and disorder function.

Users can look for a specific protein, e.g., Alpha-synuclein from Homo sapiens, by submit-
ting the protein name, e.g., Alpha-synuclein, or its corresponding UniProtKB accession
number, P37840. They will be redirected to the corresponding DisProt entry, in this case
DisProt identifier DP00070.

DisProt can be accessed programmatically via REST API to retrieve a single entry (or re-
gion) and to perform large-scale database searches

Here we present a use case, human p53 (DisProt entry: DP00086), to explain how to vi-
sualize and interpret a DisProt entry page and its annotations. The human p53 entry, also
shown in the home page examples, has been recently updated (DisProt release 2020_06)
with more than 40 new annotations coming from 15 scientific articles. p53, one of the
most well-characterized IDPs.


The minimal information included in an evi-
dence is the reference (PMID or DOI) to a scientific publication, an experimental method
associated to the IDR, the start and end positions of the region, and a disorder aspect as-
sociated to the IDR.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q100444216)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q100444216)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q100444216&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/CPBI.107)  
