
Protein ontology on the semantic web for knowledge discovery
============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q100525924]  

ScientificData            (2020)
# Highlights
As an evolving extension to the current hypertext document web, Linked Open Data (LOD) is a new paradigm where data are published and interconnected on the web using open standards
the Linked Data principles1: 
(1) Use URIs as names of things; 
(2) Use HTTP URIs, so that people can look up those names; 
(3) When someone looks up a URI, provide useful information using the standards (RDF, SPARQL etc.); and 
(4) Include links to other URIs, so that they can discover more things.

The Protein Ontology (PRO) provides an ontological representation of protein-related entities, notably, including those of organism-neutral nature15.

The Protein Ontology has been used by the research community for applications including named entity recognition/tagging, entity definition (for example, of cell types)

Category = family. Each PRO term at the family level refers to protein products of a distinct gene family arising from a common ancestor.

--> Evolutionary criteria as the standard

Category = gene. Each PRO term at the gene level refers to the protein products of a distinct gene in a reference organism and the orthologs thereof. For example, “smad2” and “smad3” are two different genes, and therefore have two different PRO entries at the gene level of distinction.

Each PRO term represents a distinct class of organism-neutral or organism-specific protein entities (e.g., mod-ified forms, orthologous isoforms, and protein complexes).

e protein products of what is recognized as smad2 in humans and what is recognized as smad2 in mouse fall under the single gene-level term “smad2”. Thus, a single term at the gene-level distinction collects the protein products of (usually 1-to-1) orthologs for that gene. Organism-specific versions are (typically) defined logically as the intersection of the parent (gene-level) and the organism (taxonomic) terms. If a resource provides gene information, PRO will indicate this using the has_gene_template relation.

--> Nice!! The organism-neutral x organism pattern is great.


Category = seqgroup. Each PRO term at the seqgroup level refers to proteins encoded by the same gene that are distinguished from siblings based on differences in shared portions of encoding mRNAs. That is, all members of a given seqgroup are encoded by mRNAs that have a common subset of sequence features, either as a com- mon subset of exons or as a common subset of sequence variations.
Examples include proteins encoded by the PTPRC (CD45) gene, where each member of the CD45R subtype (CD45RA, CD45RAB, CD45RAC) minimally contains exon 4 (aka ‘A’) even while each member of a given subtype has other exons that make them distinct, and histocompatibility genes such as HLA-A, where each member of a given subtype (HLA-A*24, HLA-A*68, etc) shares a common set of variations even while each member of a given subtype has other variations that make them distinct.

Category = sequence. Each PRO term at the sequence level refers to the protein products that arise from different alleles of a given gene (sequence variants), from splice variants of a given RNA, or from alternative initiation and ribosomal frameshifting during translation.

Category = modification. Each PRO term at the modification level refers to the protein products derived from a single mRNA species that differ because of some change (or lack thereof) that occurs after the initiation of translation (co- and post-translational).

In general, PRO does not provide time or space information, i.e., the order in which modifications occur or the location in which they are found unless such are required to properly define the term. PRO only represents the final modified objects.

Category=complex.Each  PRO  term  at  the  complex  level25  ultimately  traces  to  the  general  term  “protein-containing complex” found in GO (GO:0032991), defined as “A stable assembly of two or more macro-molecules, i.e. proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates or lipids, in which at least one component is a protein and the constituent parts function together”

Protein Ontology Linked Open Data is accompanied with metadata description using Vocabulary of Interlinked Datasets (VoID), the Provenance vocabulary (PROV) and Dublin Core vocabulary, which are compliant with the W3C HCLS specification


If there is clear knowledge on the equivalency of the modified forms from different organisms, then the equivalent organism-modification terms are defined as chil- dren of the modification level terms.

The Protein Ontology Linked Open Data is accompanied with metadata description using Vocabulary of Interlinked Datasets (VoID), the Provenance vocabulary (PROV) and Dublin Core vocabulary, which are compliant with the W3C HCLS specification.

PRO RDF data can be combined with other RDF data, such as UniProt10 RDF data (at https://sparql.uniprot.org/) and DisGeNET27 RDF data (at http://rdf.disgenet.org/sparql/).

Moreover, according to the YummyData SPARQL endpoint monitor, PRO (https://yummydata.org/endpoint/129) ranks among the top 5 endpoints by the Umaka Score24 calculated based on six criteria: Availability, Freshness, Operation, Usefulness, Validity and Performance

--> Cool list of Endpoints!

Data integrity and consistency of ontology is checked prior to each release using the ELK reasoner31, a very fast reasoner that supports the EL subset of OWL 2 as part of the ROBOT tool.

Users can query PRO Linked Open Data using SPARQL at https://sparql.proconsortium.org/virtuoso/sparql, which is powered by OpenLink Virtuoso server community edition (http://vos.openlinksw.com/owiki/wiki/ VOS).

URL to license/terms of use for the resource 	https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

Damn damn
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q100525924)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q100525924)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q100525924/P921%3BP4510)  
