
The genetics-BIDS extension: Easing the search for genetic data associated with human brain imaging
===================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q100695457]  
  
Publication date : 01 of October, 2020  

# Highlights

Metadata are what makes databases searchable. Without them, researchers would have difficulty finding data with features they are interested in. Brain imaging genetics is at the intersection of two disciplines, each with dedicated dictionaries and ontologies facilitating data search and analysis. Here, we present the genetics Brain Imaging Data Structure extension, consisting of metadata files for human brain imaging data to which they are linked, and describe succinctly the genomic and transcriptomic data associated with them, which may be in different databases.

Here we present the BIDS genetics extension. The primary goal of the BIDS genetics extension is to link BIDS datasets to associated genetic data, especially those existing in separate repositories. The secondary goal is to provide a succinct description of the type of genetic data available, thus enabling searches through multiple imaging datasets.

If the SampleOrigin value is “brain", it is further recommended to add the TissueOrigin field (values: “gray matter," “white matter," “csf," “meninges," “macrovascular," or “microvascular"). This can further be refined by indicating the CellType field with values taken from the cell ontology [7] and, if the TissueOrigin is “gray matter", “white matter", or “csf" (cerebrospinal fluid), using the BrainLocation field (values being either MNI coordinates or labels from the Allen Brain Atlas [8]). 


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q100695457)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q100695457)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q100695457&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/GIGASCIENCE/GIAA104)  
