
Neuronal diversity and convergence in a visual system developmental atlas
=========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q101226729]  

# Highlights
In contrast to mammalian brains, the large neuronal diversity of the Drosophila optic lobe and its connectome are almost completely characterized.

We acquired the transcriptome of 275,000 single cells at adult and at five pupal stages, and built a machine-learning framework to assign them to almost 200 cell types at all time points during development.

We annotated neuronal clusters by calculating the Pearson correlations between the average gene expression of each clus- ter and 52 published bulk transcriptomes obtained from purified optic lobe neuronal types, and two additional neuronal types (Pm2 and T4) sequenced for this study.

The very high resolution of this atlas is highlighted by the fact that we found distinct cluster matches even for rare neuronal types, such as Dm4 and Dm1, which are represented by only around 40 cells in each optic lobes.

the first single-cell atlas of a complex central nervous structure at near complete saturation and throughout development. 

We identified two large neuronal clusters in the pupal datasets that received very low confidence scores from the neural network
classifier, which indicates that they might not exist in the adult dataset.

--> Existence of a type based on free interpretation of machine learning results.

 R10D10(dimm)-Gal4 and Fs-Gal4 were expressed in pupae in two large sets of cells (Fig. 2b–d) that were also labelled by anti-Prt antibody (Extended Data Fig. 8d)

--> Implici explicit definition

To investigate why neuronal types are more easily distinguished during development, we performed Gene Ontology analysis of the neuronal cluster markers at each stage. (...) This suggests that, as a general principle, the upregulation of cell-surface molecules necessary to enable synaptic specificity around P50 (Fig. 1e) causes a peak of transcriptional diversity.

--> This does not really make sense.

We described the convergence of neuronal transcriptomes of the same type and generalized previous observations of increased transcriptomic diversity in neurons during development to the entire optic lobe circuit. We showed that this increased diversity is due to a transient upregulation of cell-type specific cell-surface molecules that are involved in synapse formation, which explains how neurons with indistinguishable transcriptomes in adult brains could nevertheless serve different functions as a result of their developmental history

--> No, not really. At best, showed initial evidence.

# Comments
