
How should access to a COVID-19 vaccine be regulated?
=====================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q102542608]  

# Highlights

Prioritisation must comply with medical, ethical and legal principles. These are to be presented to the population in an understandable way so that prioritisation can be perceived as fair.

A self-determined decision about vaccination is dependent on ongoing, transparent information and education of the population regarding both the efficacy of vaccination and the associated risks.

it is to be assumed that, at least in the beginning, not enough vaccine doses will be available for all the people willing to undergo vaccination. This is when prioritisation becomes necessary.

When the first vaccines are authorised, only limited data will be available regarding their efficacy in specif- ic risk groups (e.g. the elderly, people with serious diseases and children) and regarding the question whether the vaccines will not only prevent disease onset in but also virus transmission by infected individuals.

The starting point is the self-determination (‘autonomy’)
of each individual. In principle, informed, voluntary consent is required for vaccination. Undifferentiated, general compulso- ry vaccination can therefore be ruled out. If at all, compulsory vaccination could only be justified on serious grounds and for a clearly defined group of persons.

At the same time, this touches on the ethical principle of non-maleficence or protec- tion of integrity. All prioritisation decisions must be measured in terms of whether they a help to prevent serious harm – harm that can be avoided by means of self-protection of persons to be vacci- nated through immunity, but also harm that results from a lack of protection for others.

the ethical principle of beneficence, particularly in the sense of the individual doctor’s duty of care, must take a back seat in the case of prioritisation.

The ethical principle of justice and basic equality before the law are of key importance for prioritisation decisions. Not only do they prohibit certain unacceptable differentiation criteria, but they also require in principle that (substantial) equals be treated equally and (substantial) unequals unequally.

People who subscribe to soli- darity, demonstrate responsibility towards people who are more at risk. In return, they put aside their own claim to speedy health protection – at least temporarily.Fair prioritisation decisions are therefore based on the urgen-
cy of preventive health protection.

there is not generally any need for proof of individual urgency. In any case, every individual has the right to refuse the offer of prioritised delivery of a vaccine.

Ethically and legally admissible prioritisation decisions must
also meet minimum formal and procedural requirements. They must be based on the latest and continuously updated medical and scientific facts.

--> Isso mostra como a lógica e a ética estão amarrados de forma profunda. Se as afirmações científicas forem incorretas por erro científico/erro lógico, a priorização não tem como ser feita de forma ética. 

guiding principles for the future detailed prioritisation recommendation: 
• Prevention of severe courses of COVID-19 (hospitalisation) and deaths
• Protection of persons with an especially high work-related risk of exposure to SARS-CoV-2 (occupational indication)
• Prevention of transmission and protection
• Maintenance of essential state functions and public life

--> Podemos discutir se todos esses são de fato princípios , até onde um é derivado do outro

In the context of the principle of urgency outlined above, vaccination goal 1 is the decisive one.
The groups of persons to be given priority therefore include:
 • persons (groups of persons) who have a significantly in- creased risk of serious or fatal disease progression.

The second priority group encompasses those who assist COVID-19 patients and who may themselves be exposed to in- creased risks.

In addition, protection must be afforded to persons who fulfil functions that are particularly relevant to the community and cannot be easily replaced(e.g. employees of local health authorities, police and security agencies, fire brigades, teachers and educators).

In accordance with the Protection against Infection Act (Infektionsschutzgesetz), STIKO makes recommendations for carrying out vaccinations.

As a consequence of the described dynamics in data availability and the successive authorisation of several new COVID-19 vaccines over a
period of one year and longer, STIKO must – from the methodological angle – conduct what is known as a ‘living systematic review’ of the efficacy and safety of the vaccines authorised in Europe.

According to surveys, the willingness to be vaccinated against COVID-19 is currently less than 60 per- cent.[1]
There is, therefore, a need for action.

The overall communication goal is to behave in a way that builds, maintains or restores confidence. Key aspects that increase con- fidence are the use of clear, understandable and non-technical language;[2] the ability to respond to people’s concerns[3] and the regular provision and repetition of information even when there is no new scientific evidence

--> Interessante essa menção formal aa necessidade de repetição da informação

Public concerns must be addressed in a respectful manner.This also means that questions and concerns must be taken seri- ously

# Comments



# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q102542608)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q102542608)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q102542608/P921%3BP4510)  
