
UniProt: the universal protein knowledgebase in 2021
====================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q102383737]  

# Highlights

The aim of the UniProt Knowledgebase is to provide
users with a comprehensive, high-quality and freely
accessible set of protein sequences annotated with
functional information. In this article, we describe
significant updates that we have made over the last
two years to the resource.

. We have developed a credit-based publication submission interface to allow the community
to contribute publications and annotations to UniProt
entries.

UniProt release 2020 04 contains over 189 million sequence
records (Figure 1), with >292 000 proteomes, the complete set of proteins believed to be expressed by an organism, originating from completely sequenced viral, bacterial, archaeal and eukaryotic genomes available through
the UniProtKB Proteomes portal (https://www.uniprot.
org/proteomes/).

The evaluation of experimental data published in the scientific literature, and summarizing key points of biological
relevance in the appropriate reviewed UniProtKB/SwissProt record, is fundamental to the operation of the UniProt
database. The functional information extracted from the
literature is added both in the form of human readable
summaries and via structured vocabularies, such as the
Gene Ontology (GO) 

To further ensure our data is both human-readable and
also computationally-tractable and continues to adhere tohe FAIR principles (2), we are working to standardize the
representation of all existing UniProt data on the functional impact of human variation. UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot
has curated over 81 000 variants in 13,000 human protein
sequence records from peer-reviewed literature, annotated
with information on the functional impact and clinical significance, when known

The vast majority of multi-exon genes
undergo alternative splicing to produce a variety of splice
isoform proteins, which can potentially increase the functional diversity of proteins. Currently at least 95% of human
genes are believed to be alternatively spliced (20,21) resulting in an estimated 75 000 distinct protein coding sequences.
Post-translational proteolytic cleavage, where proteins are
cleaved to remove some additional amino acid(s) or portion
of protein, creates yet more mature amino-acid chains as a
single polyprotein may generate multiple bioactive proteins
or peptides. We have adapted our data model to capture
machine-readable functional annotations for specific isoforms and polyprotein cleavage products, and now provide
such knowledge for >5000 protein sequence entries. This
enables the users to mine the data to identify cases where
alternative protein sequences generated from the same gene
have different functions. UniProtKB provides stable identifiers to both isoforms and to post-translationally cleaved
chains which are used by many of our collaborators to identify these specific protein sequences in their own resources

--> That is the integration with the PRO ontology. (tag 2.5)

The semi-automated rule-based computational annotation UniRule system (25) annotates experimentally uncharacterized proteins based on similarity to known experimentally characterized proteins, adding properties, such as protein name, functional annotation, catalytic activity, pathway, GO terms and subcellular location.

Community curation in UniProt

UniProt users have always actively engaged with us and
provide important feedback to the resource. The significant number of requests we receive through the Help Desk
for articles and annotations to be added to protein entries
prompted the development of the ‘Community submission’
page, where researchers are able to add articles that they
deem relevant to an entry and provide optional basic annotation by selecting the topics relevant to each paper from
a controlled list and/or adding short statements about protein name, function, and disease, as described in the publication. 

Contributors are asked to supply their ORCID
(https://orcid.org/), a researcher personal ID, which is used
to both validate that the submission is genuine and to give
credit to the submitter for their work (Figure 5). This enables us to leverage the scientific community as a resource
for enhancing our curated content, emulating a model already adopted by a number of model organism databases,
such as WormBase (40), PomBase (41) and FlyBase (42).
Submissions are minimally checked by an experienced
curator before being added to the Publications section of
the record. A tracker tool has also been developed (https:
//community.uniprot.org/bbsub/bbsubinfo.html) to enable
users to access and search this wealth of additional bibliography. Researchers are encouraged to add relevant publications to entries of interest to them. Since we started
the pilot in release 2019 08 we have seen a continuing increase in user submissions. As of release 2020 04 there have
been 674 submissions relating to 424 publications and 557
entries, from 149 unique users (https://community.uniprot.
org/bbsub/STATS.html).


SPARQL API that allows users to perform complex queries
across all UniProt data and also other resources that provide a SPARQL endpoint, such as DisGeNET (45), Bgee
(46), or Wikidata (47)

--> Yeah mentioned Wikidata!
# Comments

## Tags
1.3.2.2
3.2.2
2.5
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q102383737)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q102383737)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q102383737/P921%3BP4510)  
