
An integrative knowledge graph for rare diseases, derived from the Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center (GARD)
======================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q102052567]  
  
Publication date : 12 of November, 2020  

# Highlights
We developed a meta-ontology based integrative knowledge graph for rare diseases in Neo4j. This integrative knowledge graph includes a total of 3,819,623 nodes and 84,223,681 relations from 34 different biomedical data resources, including curated drug and rare disease association

By integrating well-established database resources, we developed an integrative knowledge graph containing a large volume of biomedical and research data.

Representing integrative data in the form of a graph has attracted many interests, particularly in the biomedical domain. Karczewski K, et al. have reviewed and discussed the potential and usage and challenges of integrating diverse types of omics data for human health and disease [9].

<!-- resources below -->
 In this study, we extracted and applied disease specific information sections, if applicable from our internal GARD database. Other sections, such as Resources, Organizations will be explored in the future [5].

Orphanet
Monarch Disease Ontology (MONDO)
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man® (OMIM®)
Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) 
FDA orphan drug designation provides orphan designations to drugs and biologics, which are defined as those intended for the safe and effective treatment, diagnosis or prevention of rare diseases/disorders [20]
<!-- An orphan drug is a pharmaceutical agent developed to treat medical conditions which, because they are so rare, would not be profitable to produce without government assistance. The conditions are referred to as orphan diseases. -->
Inxight Drugs is a drug resource developed by NCATS. Inxight Drugs [22] incorporates the most comprehensive subset of substances and related biological mechanisms pertaining to translational research and connects them to the appropriate disease indications.
As part of Inxight Drugs, explicit connections between drugs and conditions were manually identified from scientific articles, press releases, FDA labels, and large-scale databases (e.g. AdisInsight [23]).
<!-- https://drugs.ncats.io/ -->
resource available at https://drugs.ncats.io/ 


Such as, Gratzl S, et al. demonstrated the utility of Neo4j in developing integrated visual analysis platform for biomedical data [16]; Himmelstein D, et al. constructed Hetionet, an integrative Neo4j network that encodes knowledge from millions of biomedical studies to prioritize drugs for repurposing [17].


Object Property	Relationships
has_phenotype	Disease and Phenotype
subClassOf	Parent and Child concepts
equivalentClass	Equivalence (in terms of their class extension) of two named classes.
exactMatch	Two concepts with a high degree of confidence that the concepts can be used interchangeably.
R_rel	Relationships derived from other resources, such as “has_inheritance_type” from the HPO
N_Name	Mappings based on concepts names and/or their synonyms.
I_Code	Mappings based on identifiers, such as UMLSCUI, MONDO ID, HPO ID.
I_GENE	Mappings based on Gene symbols
PAYLOAD	Concept and DATA node


Besides “Condition”, we also derived 32 rare disease categories from GARD as individual disease classes, such as “Blood Diseases”, “Endocrine Diseases” and “Parasitic Diseases” [24], to better capture rare disease information precisely. 

To construct the knowledge graph, we utilized our in-house data integration framework named stitcher (https://github.com/ncats/stitcher)



GARD is currently managed by the Office of Rare Diseases Research (ORDR) within the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS), has remained an important portal for patients, health-care professionals, and researchers seeking to understand the current state of genetic and rare diseases

Based on the nature of the collected data and our research need, we pre-defined a meta-ontology to formally capture and represent semantic relationships among different types of data and guide data integration subsequently.

Primary class definition
We collected various types of data, we defined primary classes accordingly, including Condition, Drug, Gene, etc. which are listed in Table 1

 The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.
 <!-- YES! super nice -->


 https://disease.ncats.io/browser/
<!-- Database access not available. Please use  :server connect to establish connection. There's a graph waiting for you. -->
<!-- No useranme or password needed, good for exploration -->


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q102052567)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q102052567)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q102052567&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/S13326-020-00232-Y)  
