
A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression
===========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q102053616]  
  
Publication date : 01 of November, 2020  

# Highlights

We applied three-level single-cell com-
binatorial indexing for gene expression (sci-RNA-
seq3) to 121 human fetal samples

Single-cell gene expression profiles  for  4,062,980 cells 
--> nice!

We developed and applied
a framework for quantifying cell type specificity,
identifying 657 cell subtypes

An interactivewebsite facilitates the exploration of these
freely available data by tissue, cell type, or
gene (descartes.brotmanbaty.org).


We profiled a median of 72,241 cells or nuclei per organ [Fig. 1A; maximum, 2,005,512 (cerebrum); minimum, 12,611 (thymus)]


 For exam-
ple, cerebral excitatory neurons exhibited a
continuous trajectory from PAX6+ neuronal
progenitors to NEUROD6+ differentiating neu-
rons (92) to SLC17A7+ mature neurons ( 93)
(fig. S2, E and F). In the liver, hepatic progen-
itors (DLK1+, KRT8+, and KRT18+) (94, 95)
exhibited a continuous trajectory to functional
hepatoblasts (SLC22A25+, ACSS2+, and ASS1+)


(A) Pipeline for cell subtype
identification. Briefly, on a tissue-by-tissue basis, we subjected each main cell
type with >1000 cells to batch correction (102),

As expected,
cell types represented in multiple organs, as
well as developmentally related cell types, tended
to colocalize. Many surface proteins (4565 of
5480), secreted proteins (2491 of 2933), tran-
scription factors (1715 of 1984), and noncoding
RNAs (3130 of 10,695) were differentially ex-
pressed across the 77 main cell types

As noted above, there were 15 cell types that
we were unable to annotate during our man-
ual, organ-by-organ review (the subset named
by pairs of markers in Fig. 1C)

Fig. 4. Identification and characterization of blood cell subtypes and developmental trajectories. (A and
B) UMAP visualization and marker-based annotation of blood cell types colored by organ type (A) and cell
type (B).

MAP visualization and marker-based
annotation of macrophage subtypes colored by organ type (G) and subtype
name (H)s

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q102053616)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q102053616)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q102053616/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q102053616&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.ABA7721)  
