
Phenotypic variation of transcriptomic cell types in mouse motor cortex
=======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q102054102]  
  
Publication date : 12 of November, 2020  

# Highlights

 Here we used Patch-seq8 to combine patch-clamp recording, biocytin staining, and single-cell RNA sequencing of more than 1,300 neurons in adult mouse primary motor cortex, providing a morpho-electric annotation of almost all transcriptomically defined neural cell types

 We found that, although broad families of transcriptomic types (those expressing Vip, Pvalb, Sst and so on) had distinct and essentially non-overlapping morpho-electric phenotypes, individual transcriptomic types within the same family were not well separated in the morpho-electric space.

 High-throughput single-cell sequencing techniques have identified dozens of types of neuron on the basis of their transcriptional profiles3,4,14,15, but linking transcriptomically defined cell types (t-types) to their phenotypes has remained a major challenge16. However, to understand the roles of t-types in cortical computations, it is necessary to know their anatomy, connectivity, and electrophysiology7.

 mouse primary motor cortex (MOp)

 RNA was extracted and sequenced using the Smart-seq2 protocol21

 The resulting data set covered 77 out of the 90 neuronal t-types (Fig. 1a), with 73 t-types having at least one morphologically reconstructed neuron. The coverage was good for interneurons derived from the caudal and medial ganglionic eminences (CGE and MGE) and for excitatory neurons. 

 c, t-SNE representation of CGE-derived interneurons from the single-cell 10x v2 reference data set (n = 15,511; perplexity, 30). t-Type names are shortened by omitting the first word; some are abbreviated. Patch-seq cells from the Vip, Sncg, and Lamp5 subclasses were positioned on this t-SNE atlas23 (black symbols). d, As in c but for MGE-derived interneurons (n = 12,083; perplexity, 30). e, As in c but for excitatory neurons (n = 93,829; perplexity, 100). f, Example morphologies coloured by t-type. For interneurons, dendrites are shown in darker colours. For excitatory neurons, only dendrites are shown.

 --> Super beautiful figure.

  Fig. 2 | Sparse reduced-rank regression.a, b, A sparse reduced-rank regression (RRR) model32 to predict combined electrophysiological features from gene expression.

  We therefore suggest that the ‘tree of cortical cell types’ may look more like a banana tree with a few large leaves, rather than an olive tree with many small ones. In this metaphor, neurons follow a hierarchy consisting of distinct, non-overlapping branches at the level of families (large leaves), but with a spectrum of cells forming continuous and correlated transcriptomic and morpho-electrical landscapes within each leaf

  --> not a tree, not a tree! 
  a) Confusion matrix for classifying cells from each t-type into seven transcriptomic families using electrophysiological features. 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q102054102)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q102054102)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q102054102/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q102054102&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-020-2907-3)  
