Expression Partitioning of Duplicate Genes at Single Cell Resolution in Arabidopsis Roots
=========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q102973773]  
  
Publication date : 03 of November, 2020  

# Highlights

Gene duplication is a key evolutionary phenomenon, prevalent in all organisms but particularly so in plants, where whole genome duplication (WGD; polyploidy) is a major force in genome evolution.

Using Arabidopsis thaliana single cell transcriptomic data we categorized patterns of expression for 11,470 duplicate gene pairs across 36 cell clusters comprising nine cell types and their developmental states. Among these 11,470 pairs, 10,187 (88.8%) had at least one copy expressed in at least one of the 36 cell clusters.

According to Lynch and Trickovic (2020, p. 1861), “One of the last uncharted territories in evolutionary biology concerns the link with cell biology. Because all phenotypes ultimately derive from events at the cellular level, this connection is essential to building a mechanism-based theory of evolution.”

 Overall, we found considerable evidence of shifts in gene expression following duplication, including in >80% of pairs encoding 7,653 genes expressed ubiquitously in all root cell types and states for which we inferred the polarity of change.

 Because they are the products of both small scale duplications (SSD) and WGD, plant gene families can be very large and complex (Panchy et al., 2016).

Although there has been recent theoretical progress in how cell types originate and evolve (e.g., Arendt et al., 2016; Liang et al., 2018; Yuan et al., 2020), Vickaryous and Hall (2006) liken the problem of defining “cell type” to defining “species” – an endless source of controversy in evolutionary biology. One major complication is that although cell identity may be stable, “the same cell type can exhibit a range of different phenotypes (states)” (Morris, 2019) in response to diverse physiological or developmental stimuli. Each state of each cell type has its own characteristic transcriptome, so it is at the level of individual cell types and states that we should find the most precise transcriptomic data to explore the expression-based mechanisms that preserve duplicate genes. Studies at the tissue or organ level aggregate different cell types, obscuring patterns of gene expression that may be of interest (Figure 1; Efroni and Birnbaum, 2016; Libault et al., 2017).

In plants, several groups recently published single cell transcriptomic studies of Arabidopsis roots (Denyer et al., 2019; Jean-Baptiste et al., 2019; Ryu et al., 2019; Shulse et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019) that not only identified known cell types, including cell types represented by small numbers of cells that would be missed in conventional transcriptomic studies, but also revealed cells with distinctive transcriptomes not readily assigned to known cell types, and subdivided cell types into different developmental states. These data provide a potential resource for exploring gene duplication events at the single cell level in A. thaliana.

In plants, several groups recently published single cell transcriptomic studies of Arabidopsis roots (Denyer et al., 2019; Jean-Baptiste et al., 2019; Ryu et al., 2019; Shulse et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019) that not only identified known cell types, including cell types represented by small numbers of cells that would be missed in conventional transcriptomic studies, but also revealed cells with distinctive transcriptomes not readily assigned to known cell types, and subdivided cell types into different developmental states. These data provide a potential resource for exploring gene duplication events at the single cell level in A. thaliana.

. To determine the degree to which cell-level data provided greater resolution to detect reciprocal fixation, we tallied the number of Class 4 genes: (1) between bulk tissues (root vs. leaf SRA libraries); (2) across the 9 superclusters, roughly representing cell types; (3) across the 36 RCCs, further subdividing putative cell types into cell states; and (4) between individual cells of the 36 RCCs (Figure 1).

 Thus, at the single cell level, paralogs appear to be coexpressed 24.3-fold (1,363/56) more often than not. Alpha WGD duplicates were the most likely to exhibit significant overlap at the level of single cells, whereas gamma WGD duplicates were the most likely to exhibit significant non-overlap (Table 2).

 Evolutionary shifts in expression of paralog pairs were also observed among the remaining 59.6% of pairs comprising the cumulative root transcriptome that are expressed in 1–35 RCCs (non-RCC-u pairs). Their lack of ubiquitous expression in root cell types/states makes it more difficult to determine whether expression of a given gene in a particular RCC represents the ancestral state or the derived state, and thus to hypothesize the ancestral condition for a paralog pair with only one member expressed in an RCC. 

 ). Thus, differences in the expression patterns of alpha WGD homoeologs may be due to “parental legacy” (Buggs et al., 2014; Steige and Slotte, 2016) and not solely to genome duplication. We see some evidence of this in the correlation of our biased expression classes with the homoeologous subgenomes.

 Comparative single cell data from other Arabidopsis species, including from recently formed allopolyploids in this excellent model system, hold much promise for addressing these and other questions.



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q102973773)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q102973773)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q102973773&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/FGENE.2020.596150)  
