
The Human Phenotype Ontology in 2021
====================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q103829029]  
  
Publication date : 02 of December, 2020  

# Highlights

Here, we present recent major extensions of the HPO for neurology, nephrology, immunology, pulmonology, newborn screening, and other areas. For example, the seizure subontology now reflects the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) guidelines and these enhancements have already shown clinical validity. 

Finally, we summarize recent advances in the use of HPO in electronic health record systems.

Community contributions have added depth, coverage, and sophistication to the HPO since its founding in 2008 (1–4). The HPO team welcomes additional contributions from consortia or individuals; see https://hpo.jax.org/app/help/collaboration.

As of 15 September 2020, the HPO contained 15 247 terms, representing a 9.3% increase since the last Nucleic Acids Research (NAR) manuscript (Figure 1)

 We have recently demonstrated that phenotypic similarity approaches based on HPO-related phenotypes in the epilepsies can be used to identify novel genetic etiologies such as AP2M1 (22), to map the natural history of genetic epilepsies over time from electronic medical records (23), and to identify patterns of gene-phenotype associations (Figure 3) (24).

 We have developed templated ontology design patterns to structure OWL definitions, encoded as Dead Simple OWL Design Patterns (DOSDPs) (44). DOSPDs provide a number of advantages, including standardized patterns for the logical definitions and automatic classification.


 Proportions of terms defined in the HPO, the Mammalian Phenotype Ontology (MP) (48), the Drosophila Phenotype Ontology (DPO) (49), the Worm Phenotype Ontology (WPO) (50), the Xenopus Phenotype Ontology (XPO) (51) and the Zebrafish Phenotype Ontology (ZP) (52).

  Phenotate, a portal that allows the annotation of OMIM and Orphanet disorders with HPO terms to be formulated as assignments for students (53). 

  LOINC (Logical Observations Identifiers, Names, Codes) is a clinical terminology for laboratory test orders and results that is widely used in EHRs (55). We developed a mapping strategy (LOINC2HPO) to transform laboratory data in EHR records to HPO terms.

  
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q103829029)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q103829029)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q103829029&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/NAR/GKAA1043)  
