
"Flora of Russia" on iNaturalist: a dataset
===========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q103004026]  
  
Publication date : 17 of November, 2020  

# Highlights
Within 20 months, the participants accumulated 750,143 photo observations of 6,857 species of the Russian flora. This constitutes the largest dataset of open spatial data on the country’s biodiversity and a leading source of data on the current state of the national flora. About 87% of all project data, i.e. 652,285 observations, are available under free licences (CC0, CC-BY, CC-BY-NC) and can be freely used in scientific, educational and environmental activities.

The project "Flora of Russia", which includes all verified ("research-grade") observations of vascular plants from the country, was launched by the Moscow University team on 9 Jan 2019 to support data collection for the "Atlas of the Russian flora" (Seregin et al. 2020)

Purpose: 
For a number of years, Russian professional and amateur biologists were using Internet-based national networking systems of the georeferenced data collection for birds, invertebrates and plants. For instance, Plantarium is the most popular Russian-language resource for collecting plant and lichen photographs from around the world with emphasis on Russia and adjacent regions. However, unlike iNaturalist, it does not allow data export nor is these data included in the GBIF, since photos and other data lack licence indications. In addition, contributing observations to Plantarium requires more effort from the members.

To collect data on the plant distribution in the City of Moscow, the Moscow University team initially organised the "Flora of Moscow" project on iNaturalist on 29 Dec 2018. An immediate positive feedback from users and a surge of interest forced us to create 85 more regional projects with a uniform ideology in early January 2019 and organise them as part of the "Flora of Russia" umbrella project. Each regional portal automatically includes observations of vascular plants uploaded on iNaturalist which have achieved "research-grade" and found within the administrative boundaries of a specific federal territory. The home page of each regional portal displays its statistics and basic information.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q103004026)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q103004026)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q103004026&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3897/BDJ.8.E59249)  
