We confirm the presence of four of these microglial subpopulations histologically and illustrate the utility of our data by characterizing further microglial cluster 7, enriched for genes depleted in the cortex of individuals with Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Histologically, these cluster 7 microglia are reduced in frequency in AD tissue, and we validate this observation in an independent set of single nucleus data. Thus, our live human microglia identify a range of subtypes, and we prioritize one of these as being altered in AD.

Here, we decided to explore microglial heterogeneity in the aging and AD human brain by targeting living microglial cells.

Thus, we propose a model of microglial population structure and highlight one subtype whose frequency is altered in AD.


The extracted live immune cells from these autopsy and surgery samples primarily consist of myeloid cells (Supplementary Fig. 1a), and we observed the presence of rare non-myeloid immune cells in some of the samples (Supplementary Fig. 1b). These non-myeloid cells were collected to serve as a positive control for our experimental and computational pipeline’s ability to resolve different cell types (Supplementary Fig. 1; see Supplementary Data 1 for sorting gate used with each sample). The purified cell suspension from each processed sample was profiled using the droplet-based Chromium platform from 10x Genomics (Methods section).

. However, it is important to note the loss of power to detect some of the smaller clusters when analyzing samples separately, thus highlighting the value of analyzing all cells together when developing our population structure model. Overall, the proposed microglial cluster architecture appears to be present in all subjects.

. Thus, we elected to assign CD74high cells - those microglial cells that have expression levels of CD74 protein greater than 2 standard deviations from the mean – as belonging to cluster 7 (Fig. 7c). 

Cluster 7 – the one most enriched for DAM genes – displays enrichment for inflammatory demyelination, ischemia and AD

h AD. To facilitate their use, our data are searchable at https://vmenon.shinyapps.io/microglia, and are available through the Synapse portal (https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn21438358). The counts matrices and the cell annotations can be found in Supplementary Data 14 and 15, respectively.

<!-- Shiny App is still up, but not very good. -->

The clusters are also found in single nucleus data (Supplementary Fig. 14), consistent with the fact that our purification protocol does not appear to lose a specific microglial subtype.

These avenues of investigation are crucial to developing a more comprehensive understanding of microglial diversity and function, which will drive the development of targeted microglial therapies, and this study thus provides an important step towards the overall goal of characterizing and manipulating microglia in human brain diseases.