
Implementing a "publish, then review" model of publishing
=========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q103811380]  

# Highlights
for all practical purposes eLife is no longer a publisher: rather, eLife is now an organization that reviews and certifies papers that have already been published.

a "publish, then review" model optimized for the age of the internet.

First, we are shifting to exclusively review- ing manuscripts that have been posted as preprints.

while our long-term goal is to move science away from the use of journal titles as the primary measure of the quality of research, until an alternative takes hold, we will still be selecting papers to be "published" in eLife.

for the next six months, we will give authors of papers under review the option to opt out of posting a preprint, and will instead ask them to explain their reasons.

we are instructing our editors and reviewers to prepare public reviews for all manuscripts under consideration.

as authors get more comfortable with both the idea and our implementation of it, we expect to move towards the rapid posting of all reviews, irre- spective of the associated publishing decision

Publication as curation

All of these changes, if widely adopted, will cre- ate a version of the current publishing system that is more efficient, effective and transparent

There is no reason for papers to be reviewed only once, or by only one entity. The review pro- cess should involve multiple voices and go on for as long as the work is relevant.




# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q103811380)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q103811380)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q103811380/P921%3BP4510)  
