
muscat detects subpopulation-specific state transitions from multi-sample multi-condition single-cell transcriptomics data
==========================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q103803941]  
  
Publication date : 30 of November, 2020  

# Highlights

o evaluate method performance, we developed a flexible simulation that mimics multi-sample scRNA-seq data. We analyzed scRNA-seq data from mouse cortex cells to uncover subpopulation-specific responses to lipopolysaccharide treatment, and provide robust tools for multi-condition analysis within the muscat R package.

ost current scRNA-seq differential expression methods are designed to test one set of cells against another (or more generally, multiple sets together), and can be used to compare cell subpopulations (e.g., for identifying marker genes) or across conditions (cells from one condition versus another)6. In such statistical models, the cells are the experimental units and thus represent the population that inferences will extrapolate to.

We intentionally use the term subpopulation to be more generic than cell type7,8, which itself is meant to represent a discrete and stable molecular signature; however, the precise definition of cell type is widely debated2


In our framework, a subpopulation is simply a set of cells deemed to be similar enough to be considered as a group and where it is of interest to interrogate such sets of similarly defined cells across multiple samples and conditions. Therefore, cells from a scRNA-seq experiment are first organized into subpopulations, e.g., by integrating the multiple samples together9 and clustering or applying a subpopulation-level assignment algorithm10 or cell-level prediction11;


<!-- Interesting, but still less clear than what is expected -->

We intentionally use the term subpopulation to be more generic than cell type7,8, which itself is meant to represent a discrete and stable molecular signature; however, the precise definition of cell type is widely debated2,3. In our framework, a subpopulation is simply a set of cells deemed to be similar enough to be considered as a group and where it is of interest to interrogate such sets of similarly defined cells across multiple samples and conditions. Therefore, cells from a scRNA-seq experiment are first organized into subpopulations, e.g., by integrating the multiple samples together9 and clustering or applying a subpopulation-level assignment algorithm10 or cell-level prediction11; clustering and manual annotation is also an option. Regardless of the model or the uncertainty in the subpopulation assignment, the discovery framework we describe provides a basis for biological interpretation and a path to discovering interesting expression patterns within subpopulations across samples. Even different subpopulation assignments of the same data could be readily interpretable. For example, T cells could be defined as a single (albeit diverse) cell subpopulation or could be divided into discrete subpopulations, if sufficient information to categorize the cells at this level of resolution is available. In either case, the framework presented here would focus on the subpopulation of interest and look for expression changes across conditions. This naturally introduces an interplay with the definition of cell types and states thems


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q103803941)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q103803941)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q103803941&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41467-020-19894-4)  
