
Acoel single-cell transcriptomics: cell type analysis of a deep branching bilaterian
====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104564690]  
  
Publication date : 23 of December, 2020  

# Highlights


In this study, we use whole-body single-cell transcriptomics on the acoel Isodiametra pulchra to identify and characterize different cell types.
Our analysis identifies the existence of ten major cell type categories in acoels all contributing to main biological functions of the organism: metabolism, locomotion and movements, behavior, defense, and development. Interestingly, although most cell clusters express core fate markers shared with other animal clades, we also describe a surprisingly large number of clade-specific marker genes, suggesting the emergence of clade-specific common molecular machineries functioning in distinct cell types. 


Xenacoelomorpha are a recently established phylum of bilaterians (Philippe et al. 2011) whose phylogenetic position has long been a source of debate

In this study, we deep-sequenced whole I. pulchra hatchlings at a single-cell resolution to reveal the diversity of cell types in this representative of the enigmatic phylum Xenacoelomorpha with the aim of understanding how these different cells contribute to the organization of its specific body plan.

A few representative markers of each category were plotted to visually assess their enrichment within each cell cluster (fig. 1B). Defined categories include stem-cells, neurons, two distinct types of digestive cells, two distinct types of epithelial cells, secretory cells, and muscle cells.


 subset of secretory cells strongly expressed an ortholog of an adhesive plaque matrix protein, a protein known to form a strong glue-like substance that is molded into holdfast threads in the mussel Mytilus galloprovincialis (Inoue and Odo 1994).

Muscle cells show high marker conservation with other bilaterians. (

We could however identify many other cell type markers that can be linked to different possible neuronal functions and the enormous plasticity of nervous system architectures in the Xenacoelomorpha has now a cellular reference frame for us to understand the building blocks that give rise to this great diversity.




# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104564690)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104564690)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q104564690&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/MOLBEV/MSAA333)  
