
Ten quick tips for making things findable
=========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104683573]  
  
Publication date : 31 of December, 2020  

# Highlights

The 10 quick tips in this paper build on the fact that all information ecosystems have users, context, and content [1]. To solve the information retrieval problem, researchers must therefore think broadly about who needs that information and the context within which it is created, as well as its actual content.

. This means that the organizational strategies you use are a communication channel in their own right. To illustrate this, the author Jorge Luis Borges created a classification of animals whose categories included “those belonging to the Emperor,” “embalmed ones,” “suckling pigs,” “those included in this classification,” “those drawn with a very fine camel hair brush,” and “those that look like flies from far away” [5]. 


Finalized laboratory data is stored in Dryad [9], which allows her to cite the same data source in multiple publications with a single DOI. She can even update the data archive as new pertinent data is collected and the link will not change.
Lab protocols maintained in Protocols.io [10] ensure that future collaborators, lab members, and students can easily find her established protocols using a DOI, while keeping incomplete protocol drafts private.
Code used to analyze the data is deposited in Zenodo [11], which she can cite and update as code gets optimized and new versions are created, which also allows anyone looking to reproduce her research to also reproduce the analysis.
Posting finalized drafts of her student’s research manuscripts on a preprint site like BioRxiv [12] enables colleagues to download the draft easily, discuss in an upcoming journal club, and publish the feedback publicly in PREreview [13].
Her ORCID identifier is linked to each of the DOIs created by these repositories, ensuring that students, collaborators, tenure committees, and librarians can all access her research outputs with 1 link.

Tag all items “reptile,” “bird,” “mammal,” and so on for high-level searches, and
Tag all items with a species, which might be “unknown” or “NA” (not available), or
Tag all items at both general and increasingly specific categories if that is the standard for your discipline [24].
What should you tag? The answer is “everything” 

Do not abbrvt
Acronyms and abbreviations make communication between those who know them more efficient at the price of making them less accessible to newcomers. 



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104683573)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104683573)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q104683573&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/JOURNAL.PCBI.1008469)  
