
The Human Cell Atlas White Paper
================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104450645]  
  
Publication date : 11 of October, 2018  

# Highlights

-- HCA White Paper, core reference for - 1.4.1. The Human Cell Atlas project and its scope

The  first  draft  of  the  HCA —a  focus  of  this  White Paper —will  profile  30  million  to  100 million  cells,

This first draft and the lessons learned in building it will serve as the basis for a comprehensive atlas  of  at  least  10  billion  cells

First  is  the  desired resolution: the rarity of cell types and states to be detected, analogous to the bounds on human-variant frequency in human genetic studies. Second is disease and diversity.

A  third  bound  will  be  cellular  function.  The  HCA  will validate the existenceof identified cells and enable their functional assessment, but the functional characterization itself is not included in its scope.


Quality.The  HCA  community  will  be  committed  to  producing  the  highest-quality  data and establishing rigorous standards, shared openly and broadly and updated regularly..  A  third  bound  will  be  cellular  function.  The  HCA  will validate the existenceof identified cells and enable their functional assessment, but the functional characterization itself is not included in its scop

--> High quality HCA data means - 1.2.3. Web of Data and Linked Open Data

A draft atlas must have predefined technical bounds, such that we can determine the completion of  phase  I within  those  bounds.  This involves  determining  how  tissues  are  sampled  within organs, the rarity of cells to be recovered, the resolution of spatial coordinates, and the depth of molecular information. 

 To this end, we will follow a “Sky Dive” strategy,  with  initial  uniform  (“agnostic”)  profiling  by  massively  parallel  approaches, followed by profiling of  stratified samples (e.g., through sorting and/or enrichment or depletion of  subpopulations).  

The  key  results  of  the  draft  must  be  validated  for  their  reproducibility, integrity,  and  predictive value. Reproducibility (stability) is  defined  by  the  ability  to  recover,  through  prospective isolation  or  repeated  analysis,  cells  with  the  same  profiles  and  features  predicted  by  the  initial 
12data and analysis. I


TheData Coordination Platform will be a centralizedway to “bring researchers to the data” by creating  software  to  perform  data  ingestion,  storage,  processing,  analysis,  visualization,  and access controls.

Diagnostics.  Knowledge  of  all  the  cell  types  in  the  body  and  their  role  in  disease  will enable  updated  and  much  more  powerful  versions  of  common  diagnostic  tools,  such  as the Complete Blood Count (CBC) and next-generation biopsy.

--> "all cell types"

Unrestricted open access to the datagenerated.

Feasibility Case Study 1: Cambridge Biorepository for Translational Medicine(CBTM)

 A pilot  studyat  the single-nucleus  and  spatial  level  could  leverage  the  pre-existing  Biospecimen  Methods  Study (BMS)  in  GTEx,  in  which  samples  from  30  donors  and  six  tissues  were  collected  at  four sequential ischemic time intervals; alternatively, new collection can be performed to test this.


Initial  uniform  samplingwill  be  performed  to  profile  a  defined  number  of  cells, k,  from  a specimen with minimal, if any, additional stratification. The number of cells to be profiled must be determined based on a statistical model. An early example (Box 1) accounts for the number of cell  types  expected  in  the  tissue,  the  proportion  of  the  rarest  type  that  we  desire  to  detect,  the minimal  number  of  cells  desired of the  rarest  type,

n  assessing  the  validity  of  the  generated  draft,  we  should  consider reproducibility  or  stability, defined  by  the  ability  to  recover  (through  both  planned  replicates  and  follow-up  prospective isolation)  cells  and  cell  subsets  with  the  same  profiles  and  feature

Technology  dissemination.Early  single-cell  sequencing  techniques  required  fairly  ubiquitous skills  and  equipment,  leading  to  wide  and  rapid  adoption  (for  example,  SMART-Seq  required only  96-well  plates,  a  method  of  isolating  single  cells,  and  limited  infrastructure).  By  contrast,many spatial technologies require highly specialized tissue-handling protocols and sophisticated microscopes.

SINGLE-CELL MOLECULAR PROFILING OF DISSOCIATED CELLS 
The  revolution  in  single-cell  genomics  has  enabled  genome-wide  quantification  of  mRNA  in thousands of individual cells at once.  

While some progress has  been  made  in  single-cell  proteome  profiling51,  it  is  not  currently  possible  to  profile  entire proteomes atscale in single  cells because of limitations in detection reagents and lack of direct amplification.

A  high-definition  spatial  representation  of  cell  types,  cell  boundaries,  neighbors  or  interacting cells,  niches,  and  tissue  contexts  is  necessary  to generate  a  complete  3-D  picture  of  the  cells  in the  human  body.


Data organization in the atlas.This includes discovery and taxonomy of the different cell types and their relationships, including formally addressing the fundamental question “What  is  a  cell type?” The Atlas will be organized using multiple complementary maps and coordinate systems: spatial  and  molecular  systems  followed  by  functional,  physiological,  and  lineage-derived  maps. A key challenge will be to generate these maps and to understand how they relate to one another. To  do  so,  we  will  need  to  develop  methods  to  link  different  layers  (including  data  generated using  very  different  technologies)  and  understand  common  features.  This  will  shed  light  on  the relationship between phenotype and function.

Defining  a  cell  type  and  organization  of  the  atlas.A  primary  goal  in  creating  the  HCA  is  to define  cell  types  and  to  characterize  their  biological  roles.  A  data-driven  approach  to  this challenge   takes   single-cell   measurements   and provides a   grouping   of   cells   into   distinct subpopulations   (i.e.,   clusters).   Specifically,   each   cell   is   represented   as   a   point   in   high-dimensional  space  (molecular  phenotype),where  clustering  is  tantamount  to  finding  dense regions  of  similar  cells  in  this  space.  Numerous  computational  methods  exist  for  this  task,  but their relativemerits have not been fully assessed. As spatial data accumulate, methods should be developed  that  integrate  spatial  and  molecular  data  toward  more  accurate  cataloging  of  cell types.  Cell type definition. Before an optimal clustering algorithm can be selected, the notion of a cell type  must  be  formally  defined.  Currently,  a  cell  type  implies  significant  phenotypic  and functional stability over time, achieved perhaps through epigenetic regulation. While a cell typesuggests  a  discrete  entity,  recent  data  sets  are  highlighting  that  many presumed cell  types actually form  part  of  a  continuum.  For  example,  a  T  cell  can  exist  in  different  states  (mitotic, activated)  while  maintaining  its  identity  as  a  T  cell,  and  T  cell  activation  is  considered  as  a continuum,  rather  than  as  two  discrete  modes.  Stable  cell  types  encompass  many  states  and, therefore,  exist  in  a  diverse  but  restricted  set  of  the  high-dimensional  phenotype  space. Epigenetic  data  modalities  such  as  ATAC-Seq  will  help  distinguish  cell  types  from  cell states (Section 2 and Section 3).

--> core part for - 2.4 The concept of "cell type"

 Taxonomies.

Consequently, clustering algorithms need to find salient features of more stable cell types and distinguish cell-type variations from those associated with physiological states (such as cell   cycle),   as   well   as   to   model   continuous   trajectories   where   these   exist.   Thus,   new computational  methods  will  be  required  both  to  discover  types  and  to  better  classify  cells.  As these develop, they  will  ultimately refine the very  concepts of  cell type and state. Additionally, understanding the relationship between cell types and establishing new cell-type taxonomies will be critical. To achieve this, the AWG will coordinate with HCA subgroups to establish a series ofbenchmark data sets that can be used to determine effective similarity metrics and assess the performance of different methods

Curation.

Although  these  tools  are  useful  in  refining  our  understanding  of  cell  types,  a computational  definition  alone  does  not  automatically  convey  biological  meaning.  However, given  the  vast  amount  of  data  that  will  be  generated  for  the  HCA,  manual  curation  of  cell-type identity may become extremely challenging. To this end, the AWG will work with relevant HCA subgroups  to  generate  an  automated  way  of  assigning  putative  biological  identity  to  groups  of cells,  first  by using literature  text  mining  approaches  based  on  the  genes  expressed  in  each  cell type, and later based on new technologies for functional interrogation of cells.This will facilitate comparison  of  cell  types  across  tissues  and  enable  assembly  of  a  meaningful  taxonomy  of  cell types.

--> Not mentioning ontologies not even once is _super_ worrying

Sub-atlases.We will pursue individual tissues, organs and systems as sub-atlases, following the prioritized ranking in Table  1.  

There is, therefore, enormous potential to dramatically  accelerate  basic  and  translational  research  through  an  atlas  that  systematically characterizes, classifies, and models neuronal and non-neuronal brain cell types and makes these data  and  tools  available  as  catalytic  open-access  community  resources.  These  cell  types  could then be mapped onto a 3-D Common Coordinates Framework (Section  2) of each brain region.

Existing  efforts  along  these  lines,  such  as  the whole  brain  Allen  Human  Reference  Atlas95and  Big Brain Atlas96, provide a 2-D (and coarse 3-D) CCF with a  comprehensive  hierarchical  structure-level  ontology.

Transcriptional and protein profiles in cells and space. With these considerations in mind, we will profile all immune cell populations in blood and tissues(e.g., lung, skin, gut, lymph nodes, kidney,  spleen,  fat,  muscle)  from  healthy  individuals  and  from  disease  states.


It is important to include pediatric tissues in the HCA as one-quarter of the world’s population is 14years  of  age  or  younger.  Physiologically,  children  are  not  just  small  adults:  their  developing bodies  behave  differently  in  both  health  and  disease.  As  they  grow  and  develop,  their  bodies change  at  the  cellular  level  in  ways  that  are  poorly  understood. 

o  support  this  vital  area,  a  Pediatric  Cell  Atlas  (PCA)  will  generate  an  age-and  cell-based cellular-level  atlas  of  pediatric  tissues

Contrasting  children’s  cells  and  tissues  across  ages  through  to  adulthood  will provide a lens into pediatric treatments and diseases.


--> Pediatric Cell atlas - 2.4.7.3 Differentia for cell classes: age and life stage

The OC  establishes Working  Groups and mandates them to take on specific key areas. At the moment,  theseinclude  the  Analysis  Working  Group  (AWG),  the  Meta  Data  Working  Group (MDWG),  the  Common  Coordinate  Framework  Working  Group  (CCFWG),  the  Standards  and Technology  Working  Group  (STWG),  and  the  Ethics  Working  Group  (EWG).

Several  members  of  the  OC  have  experience  as  members  or  advisors  of  other  large  consortia, including the International Cancer Genome Consortium (Bader, Campbell, Majumdar, Stratton), FANTOM (Carninci, Clevers, Shin), 1000 Genomes (Lander), ENCODE/ModENCODE (Wold, Pe’er),  ImmGen  (Merad  and  Regev),  BLUEPRINT  (Stunnenberg),  and  the  Human  Genome Project (Lander).


compositional considerations.  To  provide  the  greatest  utility  to  humanity,  the  HCA  should itself be representative of it. Gendersmust be considered because sex impacts cells in both sex-specific  tissues and across  the  body.  Diverse  ethnicities  must  be  profiled  to  understand  how underlying  genetic  diversity  informs  the  phenotypic  heterogeneity  of  different  cellular  subsets. Multiple environments must be surveyed to understand how factors external to the body —such as temperature, altitude, pollution, allergens, and microorganisms —influence cells. A range of cultures  must  besampled  to  understand  how  lifestyle  factors,  such  asdiet  and  nutrition,alter cellular   phenotypes.   Finally,   the   target   tissues   of   globally   prevalent   diseases   must   be characterized to provide essential references for diagnosis and treatment



# Comments
ONE mention of ontology in the whole document! That is a shame.

Talks a little bit about the goals for each system.
a
## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104450645)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104450645)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104450645/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q104450645&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
