
Common cell type nomenclature for the mammalian brain
=====================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104610410]  
  
Publication date : 29 of December, 2020  

# Highlights

 To facilitate cross-dataset comparison, the Allen Institute created the common cell type nomenclature (CCN) for matching and tracking cell types across studies that is qualitatively similar to gene transcript management across different genome builds. 

 Many neuronal cell types, such as neurogliaform, chandelier, Martinotti, and pyramidal cells, have been identified based on highly distinct shape, location, or electrical properties, providing robust and consistent classifications of neuronal cell types and a common vocabulary (Greig et al., 2013; Markram et al., 2004).

 This data explosion has enriched our collective understanding of biological cell types, while simultaneously introducing challenges in cell type classification within individual studies.

Further complicating classification is the overlay of discrete cell type distinctions with graded/continuous properties such as cortical depth (Berg et al., 2020), anterior/posterior and other trajectories across neocortex (Hawrylycz et al., 2012), activity-dependent cell state (Wu et al., 2017), or all simultaneously (Yao et al., 2020b).


Standardized cell type classification needs to include (1) standard nomenclature and (2) centralized and standardized infrastructure associated with cell type classification

<!-- kind of yes, but nomenclature may be by IDs  -->

Chaining critical cell type features in the name itself, resulting in names like ‘Neocortex M1 L6 CT pyramidal, Zfpm2 non-adapt GLU’ (Shepherd et al., 2019).

While several public databases for data storage have been developed (e.g., dbGaP, NeMO, NeuroElectro, Neuromorpho, HuBMAP, etc.), a community-recognized repository for storing and tracking cell type assignments and associated taxonomies does not currently exist. This challenge has been recognized by many (Armañanzas and Ascoli, 2015; DeFelipe et al., 2013; Shepherd et al., 2019) and has been a focus of recent conferences seeking community participation toward a solution (Yuste et al., 2020). 

This challenge was also addressed at a Cell Type Ontology Workshop (Seattle, June 17–18, 2019; hosted by the Allen Institute, Chan Zuckerberg Initiative [CZI] and the National Institutes of Health [NIH]), where input from representatives from the fields of ontology, taxonomy, and neuroscience made recommendations, highlighted best practices, and proposed conventions for naming cell types.

Here we present a generalizable nomenclature convention, the common cell type nomenclature (CCN), for matching and tracking cell types across studies.

At the core of the schema are two key concepts: (1) a taxonomy, defined as the output of a computational algorithm applied to a specific dataset, which must be generated prior to implementation of this schema, and (2) a cell set, which can represent any collection of cells within a specific taxonomy (see Table 1 for definitions of key terms). These components are generated through the input of data and information generated from analysis that identifies provisional cell types (sometimes called cell types for convenience). 

<!-- I have my critics, as this is largely ontologically imprecise -->

(A) Schematic of CCN components and process. (B–D) Example outputs from the CCN. (B) Annotated dendrogram of cell types in human MTG, along with associated cell type names, reproduced from Hodge et al., 2019. Internal nodes with a term (teal circles) represent cell sets with preferred alias tags. (C) CCN annotations for a putative cell type (outlined in blue) and an internal node (outlined in orange) of this dendrogram. (D) Snippet of an output file from the CCN showing cell to cell set mappings as applied to human MTG.

Ontology	A structured controlled vocabulary for cell types.	Cell Ontology

Provisional cell type	Quantitatively derived data cluster defined within a taxonomy. This is a specific example of a cell set that is of high importance, as most other cell sets are groupings of one or more provisional cell types. Here, the term ‘cell type’ is synonymous with ‘provisional cell type.’ .	A cell type defined in a specific study

Cell set	Any tagged group of cells in a taxonomy. This includes cell types, groups of cell types, and potentially other informative groupings (e.g., all cells from one donor, organ, cortical layer, or transgenic line). Cell sets have several IDs and descriptors (as discussed below) and can also have other metadata.	A cell type; a group of cell types; all cells from layer two in MTG; all cells from donor X

<!-- mixes clusters and types all the time   -->

The CCN utilizes a strategy for naming cell types in the mammalian cortex that includes properties that are cell intrinsic and potentially well conserved between species (Table 2). This convention is used as the cell set aligned alias tag in the CCN and ideally should directly map to cell types defined in a relevant ontology (i.e., Cell Ontology [Diehl et al., 2016] or Neuron Phenotype Ontology [Gillespie et al., 2020]). While admittedly underdeveloped, this convention has been applied to multiple studies of the primary motor cortex (M1; as discussed below) and represents only a starting point for discussion.



Proposed strategy for naming cortical cell types.
Class	Format	Example
Glutamatergic	[Layer] [Projection] #	L2/3 IT 4
GABAergic	[Canonical gene(s)] #	Pvalb 3
Non-neuronal	[Cell class] #	Microglia 2
Any class	[Historical name] #	Chandelier 1

For example, many researchers favor building a gene expression-based reference taxonomy based on high-throughput, high-resolution single-cell transcriptomics assays and then layering on additional phenotypic data as they become available (Yuste et al., 2020). Molecular, physiological, and morphological characteristics of cortical neurons are highly correlated based on simultaneous measurement in individual cells using Patch-seq (Berg et al., 2020; Gouwens et al., 2020; Scala et al., 2020), making such a strategy feasible. 


Here five use cases are presented to illustrate how the CCN can be applied to published datasets using scRNA-seq and electrophysiology and morphology in multiple species. These use cases provide immediate utility and also lay a foundation for future databasing and ontology efforts.



While the focus of this study is the mammalian cortex, the CCN framework is applicable to other organs and more distant species. As an example use case, a single-cell transcriptomics study of turtle and lizard pallium found GABAergic interneuron and non-neuronal cell types to be homologous with those seen in mouse cortex (Tosches et al., 2018). 

However, the CCN is currently a stand-alone nomenclature schema that lacks the centralization and governance of gene-based standards proposed by the HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC) (Bruford et al., 2020) and does not yet have a mechanism for integrating with underlying data and metadata.

Ontology curation would allow users to associate data-derived cell sets to common usage terms from prior knowledge, and connect directly with the well-annotated ontology tools that are available for broader classifications (e.g., the Cell Ontology, http://www.obofoundry.org/ontology/). In addition, aligned aliases defined in reference taxonomies could represent a starting point for expansion of existing ontologies to presumptive cell types defined using other data-driven approaches (such as the terms in Table 2 for cortical neurons). 

 Centralizing a location for taxonomies, their associated cell sets, and underlying datasets could provide a more robust ecosystem for comparing relevant nomenclature information, other metadata, and the primary data itself. Such databases can be implemented using knowledge graph-based models (Alshahrani et al., 2017; Waagmeester et al., 2020), permitting traversal across a data, information, knowledge, and wisdom hierarchy (Rowley, 2007

 <!-- nice -->

 A potential presentation could be a ‘Cell Type Card’, instantiated as a web-accessible reference that compiles information about a specific cell set in a standardized summary. Not unlike a periodic table in structure, this concept has been implemented for genes (http://www.genecards.org), and as a prototype using transcriptomically defined cell types in mouse hippocampus and cortex (Yao et al., 2020b).

 . A cell type standards governing body would ideally be responsible for vetting ontologies for organizing data, controlled vocabulary for assigning cell type nomenclature, and will need to define a process for submission to ensure that critical data and metadata can be stored in a robust database. Deciding which taxonomies to include as reference taxonomies, along with frequency of updates, and how to address the breadth of brain regions, data modalities, cross-species reconciliation, and stochasticity of developmental and disease trajectories is essential.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104610410)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104610410)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q104610410&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.7554/ELIFE.59928)  

# Reading dates

* 2023-07-25