
Introduction to Random Boolean Networks
=======================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104815188]  

# Highlights

The goal of this tutorial is to promote interest in the study of random Boolean networks (RBNs). These can be very interesting models, since one does not have to assume any functionality or particular connectivity of the networks to study their generic properties. Like this, RBNs have been used for exploring the configurations where life could emerge


In the next section, we will review the classic RBN model,
its three characteristic phases (ordered, chaotic, and critical, some explorations of the model, alternatives, and extensions

Kauffman proposed the original RBN model, supporting the
hypothesis that living organisms could be constructed from
random elements, without the need of precisely programmed
elements (Kauffman, 1969).

The connections are wired randomly, but remain
fixed during the dynamics of the network, i.e. “quenched”.
The way in which nodes affect each other is not only determined by their connections, but by logic functions, which
are generated randomly, simply using lookup tables for each
node, which take the states of the connecting nodes as inputs, and the state of the node as output. These also remain
fixed (quenched) during the dynamics of the network.

The updating of the nodes in classic RBNs is synchronous: the states of nodes at time t+1 depend on the
states of nodes at time t, so that all nodes “march in step”.


. Since the state space is finite (2N), eventually a
state will be repeated. Since the dynamics are deterministic,
this means that the network has reached an attractor. If the
attractor consists of one state, it is called a point attractor or
steady state, whereas if it consists of two or more states, it is
called a cycle attractor or state cycle. The set of states that
flow towards an attractor is called the attractor basin.




# Comments


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104815188)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104815188)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104815188/P921%3BP4510)  
