
The status of causality in biological databases: data resources and data retrieval possibilities to support logical modeling
============================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104619209]  
  
Publication date : 30 of December, 2020  

# Highlights

 This review lists the different types of public resources with causal interactions, the different views on biological processes that they represent, the various data formats they use for data representation and storage, and the data exchange and conversion procedures that are available to extract and download these interactions. 

 Causality is a generic principle describing the effect that one event has on another, but causal associations between a subject and an object can be difficult to ascertain. Correlation could be a sign of causation, but ‘correlation does not imply causation’ [1]. To truly demonstrate causality, observations that unambiguously underpin cause and effect are needed. Sometimes, causality can be determined from an intuitive and Humean understanding [2] (e.g. a ball that is rolling hits another stationary ball, which causes this second ball starting to roll), while in other cases, justifying that A causes B can be hard to demonstrate without thorough evidence (e.g. from a controlled intervention experiment, ample repeatability of the observation, and plausibility).

 We provide a review of publicly available resources and databases that contain ‘explicit’ information (i.e. directed interaction where a source entity regulates a target entity), ‘implicit’ information (i.e. causal relation between entities represented in the process description (PD) type of biological network) or integrated causal information (causal interactions that are incorporated as parts of logical models), as well as tools and pipelines developed to infer causality.

 table 1Summary of the listed explicit and implicit data resources with causal information.

 Wikipathways [42] 	2891 pathways 	  	+ 	BioPAX, GPML 	2020 	>20 species 

 KEGG, Panther, Reactome

 Finally, the Gene Ontology Causal Activity Models (GO-CAM, [44]) consists of pathways annotated (manually or computationally) with the Gene Ontology (GO) terminology [45] (i.e. with GO terms describing biological processes, molecular functions and cellular components). Causality between entities in a GO-CAM model is defined via building blocks of the form: ‘a molecular function, enabled by a gene product, regulates a molecular function, enabled by the same or another gene product’. Therefore, causality is defined in an activity-centric way in these models, and gene products are the entities that execute these activities. GO-CAMs also enable the depiction of causal regulation between biological processes, and between a molecular function and a biological process. The models are created via the web-based collaborative editor Noctua, http://noctua.berkeleybop.org.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104619209)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104619209)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q104619209&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/BIB/BBAA390)  
