
Knowledge Organization Systems for Systematic Chemical Assessments
==================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104566070]  
  
Publication date : 24 of December, 2020  

# Highlights

This commentary presents how controlled vocabularies, thesauruses, and ontologies contribute to overcoming the streetlight effect in information retrieval, making up the key components of Knowledge Organization Systems (KOSs) that enable more systematic access to assessment-relevant information than is currently achievable. The concept of Adverse Outcome Pathways is used to illustrate what a general KOS for use in chemical assessment could look like.

Ontologies are an underexploited element of effective knowledge organization in the environmental health 


One of the major methodological innovations in chemical assessment over the last decade has been the introduction of systematic methods for exploring and synthesizing evidence. Systematic methods componentize the evidence assessment workflow, dividing it into a modular sequence of steps (Figure 1). 

One of the major methodological innovations in chemical assessment over the last decade has been the introduction of systematic methods for exploring and synthesizing evidence. Systematic methods componentize the evidence assessment workflow, dividing it into a modular sequence of steps (Figure 1). 

SR methods function best when responding to focused questions posed in “confirmatory mode” research contexts (Nosek et al. 2018), where researchers are testing a hypothesis or quantifying a specific exposure–outcome relationship using existing evidence in lieu of conducting an experiment. However, many research contexts are not confirmatory but exploratory, generating new hypotheses that might need to be tested and identifying novel issues that may warrant further investigation. In these contexts the methods of SR, developed for narrowly defined questions, rapidly become unwieldy and demand interrogation of evidence at a level of detail at odds with the broader objectives of an exploratory research exercise (Leenaars et al. 2020; Radke et al. 2020. In response to the limitations of SR methods for exploratory research, systematic evidence maps (SEMs), also known as “evidence maps” or “systematic maps” have been developed.

Systematic methods are a natural fit for many chemical assessments, providing a mechanism for meeting the expectation that an assessment fully and transparently uses all relevant evidence in the course of analyzing health risks posed by exposure to chemical substances (NRC 2014). 

The result is a lengthy location and extraction process that may still inadvertently exclude potentially large numbers of relevant records because of the “streetlight effect.” This is the phenomenon by which research tends to be conducted in established areas of understanding, rather than around novel ideas (Kaplan 1973; Battaglia and Atkinson 2015

For any given domain of interest, there will be an expansive network of related concepts and subconcepts of relevance to a SR or SEM exercise. Having a complete map of the relationships among these concepts is necessary if the full body of assessment-relevant information is to be retrieved (Figure 2); 

A controlled vocabulary (CV) is a defined list of words and phrases used to tag content in a database to make that content retrievable via navigation or search (Pomerantz 2015). It is a type of metadata (data about data) that provides an interpretive layer between the user of a database and the content in the database.

Thesauruses expand beyond the equivalence relation of synonymy by introducing an overarching conceptual hierarchy in which the CV terms are organized and related. 

Thesauruses, as hierarchical taxonomies, are a powerful strategy in KOS development. When implemented comprehensively and fully exploited by a user, they make a significant contribution to addressing the semantic and conceptual factors in the information retrieval challenge. However, being able to codify more information about the relationships between the concepts of the CV than simple hierarchies can further increase the information retrieval capacity of a KOS. After all, there are many more types of relationships than “is a class of,” however powerful that relationship is as a general organizing principle.

When a taxonomy moves beyond a hierarchy toward a representation of the properties of and the relations between concepts, it becomes an ontology. An ontology is a formal method for representing knowledge, usually within a particular knowledge domain, that relates terms or concepts to one another in a format that supports reading and searching, not only for the terms themselves but also for the relationships between those terms (Whetzel et al. 2011). 

<!-- Good split between controlled vocabs, thesauri and ontologies -->

The first step in developing an ontologized KOS is to define the things that are to be covered by the ontology (known in the technical vocabulary of ontology development as “entities”), 


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104566070)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104566070)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q104566070&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP6994)  
