
Global biotic interactions: An open infrastructure to share and analyze species-interaction datasets
==========
  
  [@wikidata:Q104904652]  

# Highlights

Biotic-interaction datasets are effectively siloed, inhibiting cross-dataset comparisons. In order to pool resources and bring to light individual
datasets, specialized research tools are needed to aggregate, normalize, and integrate existing datasets with
standard taxonomies, ontologies, vocabularies, and structured data repositories. Global Biotic Interactions
(GloBI) provides such tools by way of an open, community-driven infrastructure designed to lower the barrier
for researchers to perform ecological systems analysis and modeling. GloBI provides a tool that (a) ingests, normalizes, and aggregates datasets, (b) integrates interoperable data with accepted ontologies (e.g., OBO Relations
Ontology, Uberon, and Environment Ontology), vocabularies (e.g., Coastal and Marine Ecological Classification
Standard), and taxonomies (e.g., Integrated Taxonomic Information System and National Center for Biotechnology Information Taxonomy Database), (c) makes data accessible through an application programming interface
(API) and various data archives (Darwin Core, Turtle, and Neo4j), and (d) houses a data collection of about
700,000 species interactions across about 50,000 taxa, covering over 1100 references from 19 data sources.

Though relationships between organisms and their environment
have been studied for hundreds of years, answering a question as simple
as “What do sharks eat near California?” still requires quite some research, even for an experienced marine biologist. If we enter this
query into a mainstream search engine, we get back lists of web pages
with general information about white sharks (Carcharodon carcharias)
and leopard sharks (Triakis semifasciata) and articles about how to
avoid sharks while surfing and why sharks attack humans. The search
result closest to providing an answer is a Yahoo! Answers page that addresses the question “What do great white sharks eat?” in free-form
text without references to data sources. This results page shows that
the search engine lacks the ability to answer a question that requires
the knowledge of the interactions between species in a specific environment


GloBI also incentivizes data sharing by providing a framework for increasing the visibility of a
contributing researcher each entry is attributed to a scientist, research
institution, or other source.

The system is implemented in Java Gosling (2000) and uses (Neo4j) as a persistent data store and query system

We take advantage of free tools provided by GitHub to share, document, and discuss datasets and associated data processing software (see
https://github.com/jhpoelen/eol-globi-data).

To integrate GloBI data into web applications, statistical environments, and other interactive computer applications, two methods of
data extraction were put in place: the GloBI API, which gives web developers a way to integrate interaction data with commonly used webprogramming languages such as PHP and JavaScript, and the Cypher
query interface, a web-accessible interface that requires knowledge of
Cyphers graph query language. The Cypher method was added for specialized uses of GloBI data that are not covered by the GloBI API.

While most datasets contained scientific taxon names, only a
single source, http://inaturalist.org, contained explicit references to a taxonomy reference. References to locations varied between
using decimal degrees and using free-form text locale information
(e.g., Country: USA). Only GoMexSI used a controlled vocabulary to describe habitat and ecoregions (CMECS, MEOW). No digital object identifiers (DOIs) for references within the data sources were present, but 704
DOIs out of 1175 references were obtained from the reference text using
CrossRef, as of July 16, 2014.

An informational, proof-of-concept website, http://
globalbioticinteractions.org, demonstrates some examples of
how to embed interaction data into a stand-alone, dynamic, HTML
page

In the process of building the GloBI infrastructure and integrating
datasets, we encountered a number of nontrivial challenges that fall in
roughly three categories: (a) data sharing, (b) process automation,
and (c) term mapping

For those who are uncomfortable in sharing their datasets, we have
instantiated Dark GloBI, a version of GloBI that contains datasets accessible only with the explicit permission of the data contributors. In this
way, researchers can still take advantage of GloBIs different functionalities while using restricted datasets

4.3. Term mapping

Terms like taxon names, life stages, and locations are mapped to
existing ontologies as much as possible. Currently, identical mapping
procedures are used across all datasets; term mapping is largely a manual operation that involves inspecting mismatching terms and entering
an appropriate mapping using a CSV file. While this method holds up
nicely at this time, we anticipate two challenges: First, as more datasets
come in, the mapping files will grow to a point where a tool will have to
be introduced to curate data mappings. Second, we expect that more sophisticated, dataset-specific name mappings will be needed to avoid
mapping conflicts.

As the cross-disciplinary GloBI community continues to share, discuss, improve, and use species-interaction data, we expect that others
will step forward and open up their biotic-interaction observations to
offer an increasingly valuable ecological research resource to all.

# Comments

## Tags
1.2.4
3.2.2
1.1.1
1.3.2.3
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104904652)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104904652)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104904652/P921%3BP4510)  
