
Abstract Meaning Representation for Sembanking
==============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104092178]  

# Highlights

We describe Abstract Meaning Represen- tation (AMR), a semantic representation language in which we are writing down the meanings of thousands of English sentences.
spur new work in statistical natural lan- guage understanding and generation, like the Penn Treebank encouraged work on statistical parsing.

We lack a simple readable sembank of English sentences paired with their whole-sentence, logical meanings.

AMR is agnostic about how we might want to derive meanings from strings, or vice- versa.

AMR format (based on PENMAN):
(w / want-01 :arg0 (b / boy) :arg1 (g / go-01 :arg0 b))

AMR represents negation logically with :polarity, and it expresses modals with concepts.
(g / go-01 :arg0 (b / boy) :polarity -)

The boy did not go.

Verbs. Nearly every English verb and verb-particle construction we have encountered has a corresponding PropBank frameset.

various adjectives invoke PropBank framesets.
(s / spy :arg0-of (a / attract-01))
the attractive spy
(s

AMR aims to canonicalize
multiple ways of saying the same thing. We plan to test how well we are doing by building AMRs on top of large, manually-constructed paraphrase networks from the HyTER project

AMR has no universal quantifier. Words like
“all” modify their head concepts. AMR does not distinguish between real events and hypothetical, future, or imagined ones

# Comments
Maybe a biomedical sembank is a needed groundwork for better representation of bio knowledge.

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104092178)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104092178)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104092178/P921%3BP4510)  
