
Poised cell circuits in human skin are activated in disease
===========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104450608]  
  
Publication date : 05 of November, 2020  

# Highlights

 We profiled ~500,000 single cells using RNA-sequencing  from  healthy  adult  and  developing  skin,  and  skin  from  patients  with  atopic dermatitis  and  psoriasis.  Our  findings  reveal  a  predominance  of  innate  lymphoid  cells  and macrophages in developing skin in contrast to T cells and migratory dendritic cells in adult skin.

 ne  Sentence  Summary: Single  cell  atlas  of  human  skin  reveals  cell  circuits  which  are quantitatively and qualitatively reconfigured in inflammatory skin disease.

 The contribution of non-leukocytes such as keratinocytes and fibroblasts to cutaneous immunity and immunological memory has revolutionized our understanding of the human skin (5)

 n total, 528,253 sequenced skin cells (n = 19) passed quality control (QC) and doublet exclusion (Fig. 1A and Fig. S2). We detected on average ~3,000 genes with the 10x Genomics platform and ~6,000  genes  per  cell  with  the  Smart-seq2  protocol  (see Methods and Fig. S2). 

 To account for biases due to batch effects we performed data integration of healthy skin samples using BBKNN implementation within Scanpy

 Melanocytes  are  characterized  by  expression  of PMEL, TYR, TYRP1, DCT1  and MLANA 

 There are two sub-clusters of lymphatic endothelial cells defined by the differential expression of LYVE1 and PDPN, which are higher in LE1 and LE2 respectively (Fig. 2A-B).  We previously reported LYVE1 expression to identify initial afferent lymphatics that drain into PDPN+ collecting lymphatic  vessels  in  human  dermis  (18

 We hypothesized that VE3 may demarcate vascular endothelial cells mediating leukocyte adhesion and extravasation into the dermis.  We performed whole-mount immunostaining of healthy dermis and identified SNCG+PECAM+ (VE3) distended vascular structures in the superficial dermis (Fig. 2C).  Our  findings  support  localized  vascular  endothelial  areas  consisting  primarilyof  VE3 specialized in leukocyte adhesion and trafficking (Fig. 2C).

 Pre-proliferative keratinocytes transcribe basal layer proteins such as KRT5 and KRT14 and are abundant in our CD49fhi gate that was used to enrich for basal cells in the epidermis (27) (Fig. 1C).  Our data identifies CTNNAL1 (alpha-catulin) as a novel marker of pre-proliferative keratinocytes (Fig. 3B).


 e  observed 14 states  of  mononuclear  phagocytes  (MPs)  across  both  dermal  and  epidermal  layers (Fig. 5A-B).

As  abnormal  keratinocyte  activation  and  differentiation  feature  in  both  AD  and  psoriasis,

--> Damn, AD is Alzheimer's Disease, but also Atopic Dermatitis. NLP goes crazy.

The  post-proliferative  inflammatory  keratinocytes expanded  in  psoriasis  lesional  skin  likely  correspond  to  previously  described  CCL20-secreting keratinocytes  following  inflammatory  perturbation  (40)  and  may  be  relevant  to  the  Koebner phenomenon in psoriasis.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104450608)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104450608)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104450608/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q104450608&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.369363)  
