
Probabilistic gene expression signatures identify cell-types from single cell RNA-seq data
==========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q104371272]  

# Highlights

Here we present a computationally light statistical approach, based on Naive Bayes, that leverages public datasets to combine information across thousands of genes and probabilistically assign cell-type identity.

This improved granularity permits the identification or discovery of distinct populations of cell-types within the tissues under study. To effectively accomplish this, it is important to classify cells reliably into known cell-types, in particular cells that are present in many tissues such as immune system cells.

For instance, in CD4 cells, the markers had non-zero counts in anywhere from 0% to 38% of the cells. As a result, many marker genes that have been established as reliable indicators of cell-type on the bulk level are no longer adequate on the single cell level.

Naive Bayes defines a conditional distribution for each target cell by estimating a cell-type-specific expression rate for each gene

"These findings suggest that the identity assigned to a given cell depends on the size of the dataset, in a way that is not representative of the actual cell-types in the data."

Specifically, we selected marker genes for CD4 (IL7R, CD4, CTLA4, FOXP3, IL2RA, PTPRC), CD14 (CD14, LYZ, FCGR3A, CD68, S100A12), CD8 (CD8A, CRTAM, NCR3, CD3D), and NK cells (GNLY, NKG7, PRR5L, S1PR5, NCAM1) that have been curated and well-established in the literature as discriminating among cell types. 

We explicitly include the total number of observed transcripts Ni to account for the varying coverage across cells. Note that the vector (λ1k, . . . , λJk)? can be considered the expression profile that defines cell-type k.

This approach allows the certainty of the classification to be directly quantified. For example, if a target cell has a relatively low probability of belonging to any of the reference cell-types, this might indicate contamination or potentially a novel cell-type population.

We explicitly model the cell-type-specific probability distributions of these genes with a hierarchical approach that increases power in the presence of sparsity.

# Comments

Interesting. We want to study the cell types themselves, not the cells per se. 

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q104371272)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q104371272)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q104371272/P921%3BP4510)  
