
Towards Operational Abduction from a Cognitive Perspective
==========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q105516744]  
  
Publication date : 01 of March, 2006  

# Highlights

--> Can't copy and paste, I'm going to transcribe parts of it


Diminishing awareness is a consequence of the information explosion: disciplines are becoming increasingly specialized; individuals and groups are becoming ever more insular. This article considers how awareness can be enhanced via operational abductive systems. 

--> Then mentions Don Swanson and the Raynaud/fish oil discovery. 

Swanson's discovery is an example of an abductive scientific discovery. Gabbay and Woods have convincingly argued that abduction has its roots in cognitive economy. Put crudely, it is cheaper to guess, than to pursue a deductive agenda in relation to a problem at hand.

--> Talkes about geometric properties in a conceptual space.

In light of the introdutory remarks above, it is our conviction that it would be misguided to adopt a traditional, symbolic perspective of an abductive logical system by assuming a propositional knowledge representation and proof-theoretic approaches for driving it. Gabbay and Woods argue that this perspective is conceptually incomplete - it ignores what is going on "down below". 

We advocate semantic spaces as a computational approximation of Gardenfors conceptual space. Hypotheses generated from semantic spaces do not have a proof-theoretic basis, but rather they are computartions of associations by various means within the space.

--> Then show word correlations, similar to word2vec outputs.

--> It describes the use of these vectors for A-B-C Swanson-like systems.

Our goal is to first ascertain how far semantic spaces can be exploited without recourse to a priori prescribed structural relationships.

It is easy to generate hypotheses, far harder is it to generate relevant hypotheses.

CS Peirce's view on abduction: "No reason whatsoever can be given for it, as far as I can discover; and it needs no reason, since it merely offers suggestions.

# Comments

## Tags
1.1.1. Literature Based Discovery, hidden knowledge and text-mining
1.2.1. Descriptional logic and its historical context

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q105516744)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q105516744)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105516744/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Towards%20Operational%20Abduction%20from%20a%20Cognitive%20Perspective'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
