
Tacit Knowledge, Trust and the Q of Sapphire
============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q105516720]  
  
Publication date : 01 of February, 2001  

# Highlights

The idea of ‘tacit knowledge’, first put
forward by the physical chemist Michael Polanyi, has been studied and analysed over
the last two decades.
The importance of personal contact rbetween scientists is brought out and the sources of trust described. It is suggested
that the reproduction of scientific findings could be aided by a small addition to the
information contained in experimental report. 


There is also a burgeoning literature on tacit
knowledge and expert systems and other ‘intelligent machines’, and the
philosophy of tacit knowledge and the notion of practice in general.° Here
I apply the idea to the lived world of experimental scientists. The new
categorization of tacit knowledge is intended not to deepen our understanding at a philosophical level, but to explicate the idea clearly and to
draw out its implications for scientific practice.


here transfer of tacit
knowledge is a problem it can sometimes be solved by an exchange of
visits: experimenter (B), who cannot accomplish a measurement or make a
piece of apparatus work, will often succeed after spending time in the
laboratory of an already accomplished experimenter (A), or after having A
work for a period in B’s laboratory. At least five kinds of knowledge can be
passed on by such personal contact:


- Concealed Knowledge: A does not wantto tell ‘the tricks of the trade’
- Miusmatched Salience: There are an indefinite number of potentially
important variables in a new and difficult experiment and the twoparties
focus on different ones. Thus, A does notrealize that B needsto be told to
do things in certain ways, and B does not know theright questions to ask.
The problem is resolved when A and B watch each other work.
- Ostensive Knowledge: Words, diagrams, or photographs cannot convey
information that can be understood by direct pointing, or demonstrating,
or feeling.
- Unrecognized Knowledge: A performs aspects of an experiment in a
certain way without realizing their importance; B will pick up the same
habit.  Much Unrecognized Knowledge becomes recognized and
explained as a field of science becomes better understood, butthis is not
necessary.”
- Uncognized/Uncognizable Knowledge: Humans do things such as speak
acceptably-formed phrases in their native language without knowing how
they doit. Such abilities can be passed on omly through apprenticeship and
unconscious emulation.


Second, as we understand more science we learn to make explicit
elements of our knowledge which we did not know we knew: Unrecognized Knowledge becomes recognized, and can then be passed
on without personal contact.

Fourth, mechanical or ‘turnkey’ methods for packaging the experiment are worked out, replacing the need for tacit knowledge (which is
the direction in which the case discussed below is now heading).

--> And the direction that I am heading too

what would affect Western confidence in the
Russian results?
First, the result is not a priori improbable:it violates no scientific laws,
expresses nothing radically discontinuous with whatis already known,
Second, it 1s easier to get a false low reading in Q-measurement
experiments than a false high reading.

There are many
ways in which energy can dissipate unwantedly and unknowingly from the
system, but few waysin which such a crystal can be unknowingly energized
at its natural frequency so as to decay more slowly than it otherwise would.
Here, mistakes tend to produce poor results rather than positive results.


Third, however, the measurementof Q is currently very mucha ‘craft’.
It turns on methods of suspending a crystal so that little or none ofits
energy of vibration will be dissipated in the suspension

Fourth, crystals vary, and non-Russian scientists could not be sure that
it was not the Russian crystals that were special.

‘Checkhow’ — worked in the Glasgow laboratory for a week. In neither case
was a high-Q measurementachieved. Nevertheless, after only a few days in
Russia, the Glasgow team had becomeconvinced that the Russian results
were correct.

He would keep varying the parameters by tiny amounts,
because he knew to do that from the work he had done previously. And
there would be enormoustime put into it. And we would besitting
watching... And once you knowto dothat [you can succeed] — but until
you knowthat, it’s hard.

Knowledge about the degree of vacuum andthe length of the suspension belong to categories 1 and/or 2 (Hidden Knowledge/Mismatched
Saliences).

we do not have an exact language for describing ‘degree of care
that needs to be taken’, so coming to understandit is a matter of Ostensive
Knowledge — category 3.

Something similar applies to the material of the suspension fibres.
Checkhov used very fine Chinese silk thread which he supplied to the
Glasgow group (who had earlier used steel piano wire). 
The nature of suspension materials and clamping seem to belong
in categories 2 (Mismatched Salience), 3 (Ostensive Knowledge), and 4
(Unrecognized Knowledge).


e concede, of course, that within the current conventions of
scientific writing, setting out these difficulties would look like weakness;
science is conventionally described as though it were effortless, and the
accepted scientific demeanour reinforces this impression. What we are
suggestingis a slight transformation of convention and demeanour—with a
view to improving the transmission of scientific knowledge.
# Comments

Solvable with Robot Scientists, then no tacit knowledge is allowed :)
## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q105516720)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q105516720)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105516720/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Tacit%20Knowledge%2C%20Trust%20and%20the%20Q%20of%20Sapphire'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
