
Replacement of an Essentialistic Perspective on Taxonomic Definitions as Exemplified by the Definition of "Mammalia"
====================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q105870481]  
  
Publication date : 01 of December, 1994  

# Highlights

Abstract.—Current controversies  about the  definitions  of  taxon names reflect  different  under-lying philosophical  perspectives concerning the nature  of definitions.  The antithetical  perspec-tives,  called  methodological  essentialism  and  methodological  nominalism  (Popper,  1966, Theopen society and its enemies, Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ), are exemplified by alternativeviews  in  a  controversy  surrounding  the  definition  of  the  name  "Mammalia."  Traditional  per-spectives on the definition  of "Mammalia" are essentialistic in that the definition  takes the  formof a description  stated in terms  of the traits  of individual organisms, thus implying that taxa areabstract  categories,  i.e., that  taxa  have  essence.s.  In  addition, the  extension  of  the  defined  term(the set  of  species or organisms to which  the name applies)  is logically prior  to its intension  ordefining formula (the property or properties that a species or organism must have to be designatedby  the  name). Consequently,  the  name  is treated  as  if  it  had  a designation  proper  to it,  whichconforms with the essentialistic view that the name is an abbreviated description  of the essence.An alternative  perspective  is manifested  in  the  redefinition  of  "Mammalia" as the  name  of  themonotreme and therian  crown clade. This perspective  contrasts with the traditional one in  thatthe definition  is stated in terms  of common  ancestry relationships rather than organismal traits,thus implying that taxa are concrete composite wholes rather than abstract categories. In addition,the defining  formula  is logically prior  to the  extension  of the  defined  term, and  thus the  nameis treated  only  as a convenient  label or shorthand  symbol  for  the  defining  formula  that  has noproper designation. The replacement  of an essentialistic perspective on the definitions  of "Mam-malia" and  other  taxon  names  by  a  more  nominalistic  one  is associated with  the  developmentof  a phylogenetic  perspective  on  biological  nomenclature  and  represents  an  important  step  inthe development  of a more broadly  scientific approach  to that subject. [Definition;  essentialism;nominalism; Mammalia; nomenclature; philosophy; taxonomy; Karl  R. Popper.]

--> Very strong abstract. I'd note that abstraction and essencialism are fundamentally different, you can, of course, have nominalistic abstractions. They are concrete abstractions, if you allow the paradox. They are well defined, with intension prior to extension though imaterial. 

it should not be surprising that definitions formulated in the context of the phylogenetic system are coming into conflict with older definitions of the same names

he  philosopher   Karl  Popper,   mostwidely  known  among  systematists  for  hiswritings  on  the  scientific   method   (e.g.,Popper,  1959,  1962; see  Bock,  1973; Wiley,1975;  Platnick  and  Gaffney,   1977,  1978a,1978b), called attention  to a distinction be-tween  what  he  called  methodological  essen-tialists and  methodological  nominalists  basedon differences  in their perspectives on  def-initions  (Popper,  1964,  1966).  Popper  il-lustrated the difference between the essen-tialistic and nominalistic perspectives usingthe sentence  "A puppy  is a young dog" asan  example  of  a  definition  or  definition-sen-tence (Popper,  1966[2]:10). In  Popper's  ter-minology,  "The  subject  of  such  a  defini-tion-sentence,  the  term  'puppy',  is  calledthe  term  to  be defined  (or  defined  term);  thewords  'young  dog'  are  called  the  definingformula"  (Popper,  1966[2]:10,  emphasis  inoriginal).

--> Nicely within the tradition of analytical philosophy


Popper  (see  also  Griffiths,   1974)  tracedthe roots of the essentialistic  interpretationof  definitions  to the  philosophies  of  Platoand  Aristotle,  who  considered  "the  termto  be  defined  as a  name  of  the  essence  ofa  thing,  and  the  defining  formula  as  thedescription   of  that  essence"   (Popper,1966[2]:10)


 "the essentialist interpretation  readsa definition  'normally', that  is to say,  fromthe left to the right" (Popper, 1966[2]:14, em-phasis in  original). In other words, the es-sentialistic  interpretation  starts  with  theterm  to  be  defined  and  then  asks  for  itsmeaning  (i.e., defining  formula).

--> Good point for the discussion at 2.4.4. A pragmatic definition of cell type

According  to  Popper,a  definition,  as it  is normally  used  in  modern science,must be read from  back to front,  or from  the right to  theleft; for  it  starts  with  the  defining  formula,  andasks for  a short  label  to it. Thus the scientific  viewof the definition  "A puppy  is a young dog" wouldbe that  it  is an  answer  to the  question  "What  shallwe call a young dog?" rather  than  an answer to thequestion  "What  is a  puppy?"  (Popper,  1966[2]:14,emphasis  in  original)

--> Just beautiful!

 "learn the definition  [ofeach  new  scientific  term] 'from  the  left  tothe  right', substituting,  as  if  it were  an es-sentialist  definition,  a very  long  story  fora very  short one" (Popper,  1966[2]:15, em-phasis in original). But this has nothing  todo  with  the  original  formulation   of  thedefinition,  which  took place only after  theneed  for  a  concise  way  of  referring  to  anexisting  concept  or  entity  had  arisen. Fi-nally, for  a nominalist, the particular  termchosen  is  more  or  less  arbitrary,  becausenominalists "regard  words  merely  as usefulinstruments  of description"  (Popper,  1964:29,emphasis in  original)


 Popper  (1966[2]:9) held  the  view  thatevery discipline,  as long as it used the  Aristotelianmethod  of  definition,  has  remained  arrested  in  astate  of  empty  verbiage  and  barren  scholasticism,and  . . . the  degree  to  which  the  various  scienceshave  been  able  to  make  any  progress  [has]  de-pended  on  the  degree  to  which  they  have  beenable  to  get  rid  of  this  essentialist  method

 --> So sharp!

 My  char-acterizations  of alternative positions on thedefinition  of  taxon  names  as  essentialisticor nominalistic follow Popper's (1964,1966)distinction between methodological essen-tialism  and  nominalism,  which  refers  todifferent   perspectives  on  the  interpreta-tion  of  definitions  without  any  necessaryconnotations about the metaphysical  issueconcerning  the  existence  of  universals

 Nevertheless,   taxonomists   have   beenlargely  unaware  of  the  philosophical  po-sitions implied by their views, which  oftenare  amalgamations  of  ideas  that  are  indi-vidually  compatible  with  different  philo-sophical positions.

Fourth, the term "essentialistic" has sev-eral  meanings.  Often  it  is  applied  ratherloosely  as  a  means  of  denigrating  an  op-ponent's  position.  My  use  of  the  term  isnot  so intended.  I have  adopted  Popper'sterminology   because  his  distinction   be-tween  (methodological)  essentialism  andnominalism  forms  the  foundation   of  myargument.

The  tradi-tional  approach  states  its  definitions  in  away that closely resembles the  descriptionof a Platonic or Aristotelian essence. It readsthe definition  from  "left  to right," startingwith  the  name  and  then  asking  for  itsmeaning,

reating  lists  of  organismal  traits,i.e., descriptions  of  individual  organisms,as  the  defining  formulas  of  taxon  namesimplies  that  taxa  are  abstract   categories(kinds), the  members  of  which  belong  those  categories  for  the  reason  that  theyshare  certain  (defining,  essential)  charac-ters. 

To  answer  the  question  'What  are  mam-mals?' we still must identify  diagnostic  fea-tures." Only by confusing  definitions  withdiagnoses  is  Miao  able  to  criticize  a  defi-nition  for  not doing the job  of a diagnosis.Confusions  of  this  kind  are  not  surpris-ing  under  an  essentialistic  interpretationof  definitions. 

--> The same is seen for classification x identification of cell types

Perhaps  because  certain  fossils  compro-mised  the  distinctiveness  of  the  mamma-lian  jaw  articulation,  some  recent  defini-tions   of   "Mammalia"   have   emphasizeddifferent characters. But here again, the  def-initions  rest  on  prior  establishment  of  themammalian   status   of   particular   fossils.These  cases also demonstrate  that  a meth-odologically  essentialistic  perspective  canbe adopted even when definitions  are stat-ed in  terms  of phylogenetic  relationships


he  difference  between  methodologicalessentialists and  methodological  nominal-ists  concerning  their  perspectives  on  therelationship between defined  term and de-fining  formula  leads  them  to  attach  verydifferent  significance  to  the  designationsof  particular  names.  Because  essentialistsgrant  primacy  to  the  defined  term,  theynecessarily attach much significance  to thedesignations  of  particular  names.  Accord-ing to Popper  (1966[1]:31), methodologicalessentialists consider  it the  task  of  science"to discover and to describe the true natureof  things,  i.e.  their  hidden  reality  or  es-sence."  They  believe  "that  every  essence. . . may  be  described  in  words. And  a de-scription  of  the  essence  of  a  thing  they[call] a 'definition.'  


Thus,  for  an  essen-tialist,  the  name  used  to  designate  a  par-ticular taxon  is not arbitrary—one  name isnot  just  as good  as any  other.Methodological  nominalists  reverse  therelationship between defined  term and de-fining  formula,  and  this  leads  them  to  at-tach  much  less  significance  to  the  desig-nations  of  particular  names.

  "methodological  nom-inalism  sees the  aim  of  science  in  the  de-scription  of  the  things  and  events  of  ourexperience  . . . words it considers rather assubsidiary  tools  for  this  task,  and  not  asnames  of  essences"  (Popper,  1966[1]:32)

Taxonomists  have  traditional-ly viewed their definitions  of  "Mammalia"as answers to the question "What are mam-mals?"  Thus,  this  very  question  (or  thevariant  "What  is  a  mammal?")  has  beenstated explicitly by at least six different  au-thors  in  connection  with  traditional  defi-nitions of "Mammalia" (Olson, 1959; Simp-son, 1959; Reed, 1960; Aulie, 1975; Thenius,1979; Miao, 1991).

--> What is a "cell type"? Really, it is nothing. 

tive, advocates  of  thecrown  clade  definition  of  "Mammalia"  donot  view  their  definition  as  an  answer  tothe question "What are mammals?" or even"What  is the  meaning  of  the  name  'Mam-malia'?"  Instead,  the  crown  clade  defini-tion is meant to answer the question "Whatshall we  call the  clade stemming  from  themost  recent  common  ancestor   of  mono-tremes  and  therians?"  This  interpretationof  the  definition  is  ev

--> I suppors those folks
Biological taxonomy is widely held to beone  of  the  oldest  scientific  disciplines,  itsorigins often  being traced to Aristotle. De-spite  the  considerable  advances  that  tax-onomy   has  undergone   since   Aristotle'stime,  the  influence  of  the  Greek  philoso-pher  is  still  felt  in  a widespread  perspec-tive  on  the  nature   of  taxonomic   defini-tions—a perspective considered by Popper(1966)  to  be  extremely  detrimental  to  sci-entific  progress. 

Taxonomists  themselveshave  been  largely  unaware  of  their  im-plicit  adoption  of  the  Aristotelian  (meth-odologically  essentialistic)  perspective  ondefinitions. 

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q105870481)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q105870481)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105870481/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q105870481&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105870481/P921%3BP4510)  
