
The Philosophy of Logical Atomism, Lecture 1: Facts and Propositions
====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q105105637]  
  
Publication date : 01 of October, 1918  

# Highlights

As I have attempted to prove in The Principles of Mathematics, when we analyze mathematics we bring it all back to logic. It all comes back to logic in the strictest and most formal sense

When I say that my logic is atomistic, I mean that I share the common-sense belief that there are many separate things; I do not regard the apparent multiplicity of the world as consisting merely in phases and unreal divisions of a single indivisible Reality. 


I do not propose to meet the views that I disagree with by controversy, by arguing against those views, but rather by positively setting forth what I believe to be the truth about the matter, and endeavoring all the way through to make the views that I advocate result inevitably from absolutely undeniable data.

“undeniable” is a psychological term and “true” is not. When I say that something is “undeniable,” I mean that it is not the sort of thing that anybody is going to deny; it does not follow from that that it is true, though it does follow that we shall all think it true – and that is as near to truth as we seem able to get.

ou are not concerned simply with the question what is true of the world, but “What can I know of the world?”

The point is that the atom I wish to arrive at is the atom of logical analysis, not the atom of physical analysis.

--> That is the goal with the technotype in 2.4.4

That is a rather singular fact, that everything you are really sure of, right off is something that you do not know the meaning of, and the moment you get a precise statement you will not be sure whether it is true or false, at least right off. The process of sound philosophizing, to my mind, consists mainly in passing from those obvious, vague, ambiguous things, that we feel quite sure of, to something precise, clear, definite, which by reflection and analysis we find is involved in the vague thing that we started from, and is, so to speak, the real truth of which that vague thing is a sort of shadow.

--> That is music to my ears.

Everything is vague to a degree you do not realize till you have tried to make it precise, and everything precise is so remote from everything that we normally think, that you cannot for a moment suppose that is what we really mean when we say what we think.

The sort of premise that a logician will take for a science will not be the sort of thing which is first known or easiest known: it will be a proposition having great deductive power, great cogency and exactitude, quite a different thing from the actual premise that your knowledge started from

he sort of method adopted by Descartes is right; that you should set to work to doubt things and retain only what you cannot doubt because of its clearness and distinctness, not because you are sure not to be induced into error, for there does not exist a method which will safeguard you against the possibility of error.
The wish for perfect security is one of those snares we are always falling into, and is just as untenable in the realm of knowledge as in everything else.

The first truism to which I wish to draw your attention – and I hope you will agree with me that these things that I call truisms are so obvious that it is almost laughable to mention them – is that the world contains facts.

 When I speak of a fact – I do not propose to attempt an exact definition, but an explanation, so that you will know what I am talking about – I mean the kind of thing that makes a proposition true or false. If I say “It is raining,” what I say is true in a certain condition of weather and is false in other conditions of weather.

 I want you to realize that when I speak of a fact I do not mean a particular existing thing, such as Socrates or the rain or the sun.

 It is important to observe that facts belong to the objective world. They are not created by our thoughts or beliefs except in special cases.

 Except in psychology, most of our statements are not intended merely to express our condition of mind, though that is often all that they succeed in doing. They are intended to express facts, which (except when they are psychological facts) will be about the outer world.

 There are particular facts, such as “This is white” then there are general facts, such as “All men are mortal.” Of course, the distinction between particular and general facts is one of the most important.

 It is obvious that there is not a dualism of true and false facts ; there are only just facts. It would be a mistake, of course, to say that all facts are true.

A proposition, one may say, is be a sentence of that sort preceded by the word “that.” For example, “That Socrates is alive,” “That two and two are four,” “That two and two are five,” anything of that sort will be a proposition.

A proposition is just a symbol. It is a complex symbol in the sense that it has parts which are also symbols: a symbol may be defined as complex when it has parts that are symbols

 Some of the notions that have been thought absolutely fundamental in philosophy have arisen, I believe, entirely through mistakes as to symbolism – e.g., the notion of existence, or, if you like, reality.

 When I speak of a symbol I simply mean something that “means” something else, and as to what I mean by “meaning” I am not prepared to tell you.

 --> That is just beautiful

 Just as a word may be a name or be not a name but just a meaningless noise, so a phrase which is apparently a proposition may be either true or false, or may be meaningless, but the true and false belong together as against the meaningless.

 ou cannot properly name a fact. The only thing you can do is to assert it, or deny it, or desire it, or will it, or wish it, or question it, but all those are things involving the whole proposition. You can never put the sort of thing that makes a proposition to be true or false in the position of a logical subject. You can only have it there as something to be asserted or denied or something of that sort, but not something to be named.
 
# Comments

## Tags

Core to         1.2.1. Descriptional logic and its historical context

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q105105637)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q105105637)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105105637/P921%3BP4510)  
