
Towards a Systematic Approach to Sync Factual Data across Wikipedia, Wikidata and External Data Sources
=======================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q105428190]  
  

# Highlights

Soon after the creation of Wikipedia in 2001, its editors started to define MediaWiki Templates to visually render factual data next to the Wikipedia article text.
Over time the amount as well as the variety in these templates have evolved, especially with regard to Wikipedia language editions (WPLE). There is a schematic
heterogeneity between templates with different parameters or properties (e.g.
over 30 ways for “birthDate”, “dateOfBirth”) for the same type of value as well
as different syntactical ways and sub-templates to express the value itself (“1879-
03-14”, “March 14th, 1879”). On top, each Wikipedia language edition defines its
own templates which in most cases differ from all other 300 language editions

In sum, while Wikidata focuses on the knowledge base itself, DBpedia focuses on novel ways to maintain, curate and fuse
knowledge graphs with the data being side-product and instrument.

Using the November 2020 Wikipedia dump, we were able to extract 725.4
million facts from 140 WPLEs as well as 8.8 million references from 11 WPLEs
using our novel InfoboxReferenceExtractor, which indicates that there is still a
high amount of duplicate effort spent in curating Wikipedia mostly in parallel to
Wikidata. We presented an approach (Section 5) that can still greatly improve
by integrating the long tail of information from Linked Data.

For example, we discovered that citypopulation.de
uses Wikipedia and Wikidata as source but is likewise referenced by Wikipedia
and Wikidata creating a cycle. The large size and the many details pose indeed
a huge challenge, which cannot be solved by “doing more work” (cf. Section 3),
but require a deeply rooted innovation
# Comments

## Tags
- 1.2.4. Wikidata and Knowledge Graphs

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q105428190)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q105428190)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105428190/P921%3BP4510)  
