
Much more than a mere technology: A systematic review of Wikidata in libraries
==============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q105429450]  
  
Publication date : 01 of March, 2021  

# Highlights

While Wikidata holds great potential to become the repository choice for authority data disambiguation and linking, its sustainable integration into library operations remains a challenge.

Wikidata provides a way for librarians to embrace social justice and practice librarianship on a global scale for the public good.


Before the emergence of Wikidata, the Semantic Web generally remained technologically inaccessible to most librarians, making its adoption in libraries painstakingly slow (McKenna et al., 2018). 

Marshall and Shipman (2003) argue that throughout history visionaries and scientists have consistently underestimated the complexities of artificial intelligence and ensuing human-machine interactions that underpin them. 

By his own admission, Berners-Lee, the founder of the current web and also the visionary behind the idea of the Semantic Web, conceded that his vision of the Semantic Web remains unrealized because “the ontologies that will furnish the semantics for the Semantic Web must be developed, managed, and endorsed by practice communities.” (Shadbolt et al., 2006, p. 99). 

With Wikidata successfully serving as a LOD repository of facts, the vision idea of the Semantic Web no longer seems far-fetched.

<!-- YES!! Core for 1.2.4. Wikidata and Knowledge Graphs -->

With its intuitive interface and tools, Wikidata has made it relatively easier for libraries to upload and share their local metadata globally via Wikidata. In fact, the majority of data in Wikidata today comprise scholarly metadata (Wikidata - Special: Statistics, n.d.).

This article aims to collect, analyze, and summarize how Wikidata is being used in libraries by way of a systematic review of the current LIS literature.

Over three-quarters of the published articles in the sample of articles (77%) can be categorized as experimental where Wikidata is utilized in some fashion as part of a project or prototype.

RQ2: To what end is Wikidata being experimented with in libraries?

“Wikidata as a solution to the problem of siloed ontologies that frequently share authoritative names for the same entities.” (Cooey, 2019, p.83) In particular, Wikidata due to its open, free, and collaborative stance, has proven to be very useful as a linking hub for authority identifiers (Neubert, 2017). 


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q105429450)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q105429450)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105429450/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q105429450&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
