
A competency question-oriented approach for the transformation of semi-structured bioinformatics data into linked open data
===========================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q105870679]  
  
Publication date : 01 of April, 2020  

# Highlights


ince plain processed data have no explicit semanticvalue, the extraction of additional knowledge through data exploration would benefit from the transformationof bioinformatics data into Linked Open Data (LOD). 

According to this approach, a setof competency questions drive not only the definition of transformation rules, but also the data transformationand exploration afterwards. The paper also presents a support toolset and describes the successful applicationof the proposed approach in the functional genomics domain.

Bioinformatics data are semi-structured in nature. Data obtaineddirectly from a molecular biology experiment are called raw data. Oncedifferent sets of raw data are available they must be pre-processed(normalized) in order to make them comparable.

There are a number of publicly available SPARQL endpoints inthe biomedical domain, such as UniProt2(The UniProt Consortium,2015, 2017), Gene Ontology,3Bio2RDF4(Dumontier et al., 2014) andWikiPathways5(Waagmeester et al., 2016)

Jupp et al. (2014) propose a platform namedEBI RDFfor theintegration of multiple biological databases. The development of thisplatform started with the identification of transformation requirementsposed by scientific specialists and other EBI service users. Next, theserequirements were used to identify possible integration points betweenthe databases and to define the necessary infrastructure to delivera stable and scalable service. Finally, different OWL ontologies andvocabularies were used to semantically annotate the source data inorder to create the target RDF datasets.

Merrill et al. (2014) developed a platform namedeXframeto cre-ate a unified repository of biomedical linked assays.

In order to specify an SSD to LOD transformation, we assume theSSD are stored in a matrix of values arrangement style, since this style is  the most common in the bioinformatics domain. In case the SSDare stored in a list of values arrangement style or in a hybrid style,these data must be first transformed into the matrix style prior to thetransformation.

In order to support our SSD to LOD transformation process, wehave developed a Java-based tool named SSD2LOD


Competency questions.TC 01CQ 01   What are the names of the researchers involved in theexperiment?CQ 02   Which is the gene expression data type involved?CQ 03   Which was the platform used to extract the data?CQ 04   Which organisms are involved in the experiment?CQ 05   Which type of samples were used in the experiment?

--> Cool


1.2.3. Web of Data and Linked Open Data

Since the biomedical domain most likely represents the knowledgedomain that contains the largest number of ontologies, two or moreontologies in this domain may use (slightly) different terms to representbasically the same concept or may even duplicate an existing concept.Thus, in order to identify a suitable set of concepts to be used as basisfor the semantic transformation in our case study, we have primarilyfocused on the set of ontologies standardized and maintained by theOBO Foundry1

Listing 1:Transformationrulespecificatio

--> Cool

Future research includes the application of our approach and sup-port infrastructure in other knowledge domains, possibly in the trans-formation of larger SSD datasets. In addition, we also plan to developan editor with syntax highlight in order to assist one in the speci-fication of transformation rules. This support editor would then beused as basis for the development of a more comprehensive SSD toLOD transformation platform containing additional features, such astransformation previews and improved support for the integration withremote datasets



# Comments

Nice detailing of the different competency questions.


## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q105870679)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q105870679)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105870679/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q105870679&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
