
Open Natural Products Research: Curation and Dissemination of Biological Occurrences of Chemical Structures through Wikidata
============================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q105742243]  
  
Publication date : 01 of March, 2021  

# Highlights

 To6fill this void, we collected and curated a set of structure-organism pairs from publicly available natural products databases7to yieldLOTUS(naturaLprOducTs occUrrences databaSe), which contains over 500,000 curated and referenced structure-8organism pairs. All the programs developed for data collection, curation, and dissemination are publicly available. To provide9unlimited access as well as standardized linking to other resources, LOTUS data is both hosted on Wikidata and regularly mir-10rored onhttps://lotus.naturalproducts.net.

 --> Coool! Chemical structures --> 1.3.3. Wikidata as a platform for representation of biological knowledge


 Minimal and sufficient cleaned, documented pair

 Natural products (NPs) 

 Assuming that a NP is a chemical entity28found in or produced by a living organism(“All natural”, 2007), a NPs DB should at least contain a list of29chemical entities, organisms, and the reference to the work describing the established links between them.30However, most DBs favor the chemical objects or the biological ones and just a few report the links between31these objects

 Taking FAIR principles as guidance, we selected Wikidata56(WD) for disseminating this resource as it was the best candidate with its focus on cross-disciplinary and57multilingual support. It agglomerates referenced structure-organism pairs from publicly available data. After58collection and harmonization, each documented structure-organism pair has been curated at the chemical,59biological, and reference level, resulting in atomic and computer-interpretable identifiers.


Data SourceData AlignedDB (Single Source of Truth)Data Cleaned1. Collection Harmonization2.1. Curation Cleaning2.2. Curation ValidationThis work4. Future Community ContributionsStructuresOrganismsReferencesOpen Natural Products  DatabasesTranslation Cleaning DeduplicationAutomated Validation RulesNew Data SourceCurated Documented  Structure-Organism Pairs TUSLthe naturaL prOducTs occUrrences databaSeCH3NOH3COCH3LNPNc. Collaborative Curation3. Double Disseminationb. Additiona. AdditionFigure 2: LOTUS process overview. The process consists of three main steps: Collection and Harmonization(1), Curation (2) and Dissemination (3). It was conceived to integrate Future contributions (4) either asnew data addition (a. and b.) or as curation of existing data (c.) and thus build an iterative virtuous circleempowering the community to participate in the global NPs occurrences documentation effort

--> Very cool
If organisms are often reported at least by their canonical name, structures by their145SMILES, InChI or InChIkey, references suffer from insufficient reporting standards. The major inconve-146nience is poor information retrieval26. Better reporting together with new tools such as Scholia (https:147//scholia.toolforge.org/)(Nielsen et al., 2017), relying on Wikidata, Fatcat (https://fatcat.wiki/),148or Semantic Scholar (https://www.semanticscholar.org/) should allow improved information retrieval149in the future.


Despite the numerous advantages of the WD-based hosting of LOTUS, in particular its independence from190individual lab funding, some limitations were anticipated. SPARQL queries, despite their power, are complex191and often require a good understanding of the models and the structure of the data. This can discourage192some end users as it requires there is a steep learning curve. Furthermore, traditional ways to query NP DBs193such as structural or spectral searches are currently not within the scope of WD. Based on the pre-existing194COCONUT DB template, LOTUS data is also hosted at https://lotus.naturalproducts.net(LNPN) to195facilitate such structure-based searche

Alternatively, all organisms containing a given chemical structure can240be queried (e.g., here all organisms in which beta-sitosterol (Q121802) was reportedhttps://w.wiki/dFz).

Wikidata
The currently favored approach to add new data to LOTUS is to edit directly on Wikidata. This data will then be imported into the SSOT database. There are several ways to interact with Wikidata which depend283on the technical skills of the user and the volume of data to be imported/modified.

--> Super cool


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q105742243)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q105742243)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q105742243/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q105742243&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
