
A Review of Biomedical Datasets Relating to Drug Discovery: A Knowledge Graph Perspective
=========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q106327616]  
  
Publication date : 02 of April, 2021  

# Highlights

A Review of Biomedical Datasets Relating to Drug
Discovery: A Knowledge Graph Perspective

We aim to help guide machine learning and KG practitioners who
are interested in applying new techniques to the drug discovery field, but who may
be unfamiliar with the relevant data sources.


We present an introduction to the drug discovery domain for KG and machine learning
practitioners, whilst detailing the numerous unique research challenges it poses.


We review key data sources within drug discovery, present a taxonomy based on their
primary biomedical area and consider how amenable they are for use in KGs by detailing
what type of information could be extracted from them (relational versus entity features)

Publicly Accessible - The dataset should be available for use within the public domain.
Whilst many high quality commercial datasets exist, we choose to focus on only those
datasets which are publicly accessible to some degree.


--> More information at https://github.com/AstraZeneca/awesome-drug-discovery-knowledge-graphs
--> Lists a number of datasets at
  -> https://github.com/AstraZeneca/awesome-drug-discovery-knowledge-graphs/blob/master/chapters/source_datasets.md


Term Definition
Cells Important for preclinical research and data generation, e.g. studying drug responses, gene and protein expression,
morphological responses via imaging.

--> What a mess! no definition at all

There is currently not a strict and commonly agreed upon definition of a KG in the literature [46].

Table 5 summarises the potential types of relations and features which could be extracted from the
gene and gene product resources.

DisGeNET 2010 Annually ✗
REST,
SPARQL,
SQL, Flat tile,
R, Cytoscape
✗
One of the most frequently used disease sources in
existing KGs. Contains a mix of resources including
experimental and text-mined data.

--> Maravilha

5.6.4 Untapped Resources
Finally there are resources specific to drug discovery, such as OpenTargets and Pharos, which have
thus far not been incorporated into any public KG. However, they are not currently provided in
a format enabling easy incorporation into a KG, meaning that some manual conversion process
is required. Yet they still hold great potential as a way to create a more drug discovery focused
resource.

From the time of writing, Hetionet has not been updated since 2017, although a project called the
Scalable Precision Medicine Oriented Knowledge Engine (SPOKE) [84] looks to update Hetionet
with extra data sources. However, to date, this updated resource has not been made publicly available, thus it has been excluded from our review.

BioKG. BioKG is a project for integrating various biomedical resources and creating a KG from
them [121]. As part of the project, various tools are provided to enable a simplified KG construction
process. A public pre-made version of the graph is available6
, as well as the code for building it.


Clinical Knowledge Graph. The Clinical Knowledge Graph (CKG) builds upon previous benchmark KGs but with additional focus on -omics data. Its relations come from 25 databases and 10
ontologies, many of which overlap with previous examples but notably include protein state information such as post-translational modifications from PhosphoSite [47].

Table 19 presents our evaluation of the documentation quality (be that from the original paper, supplementary material, code repository or website) and overall reproducibility of the KGs.


When looking at these existing KG as a whole, we can identify the following shortcomings:
• Lack of Updates -

• Lack of Detailed Documentation 

• Lack of Features - Almost all of these graphs do not provide any additional features for the
entities or relations. Features that are provided are usually limited to only a small number
of entities.

• No Dataset Version Information 

8 Future Challenges & Key Issues

Graph Composition. 

we would like to see more high quality
pre-constructed KGs, designed and validated by domain scientists, be made available for use by
researchers. Further, creating graph construction toolkits, in which source datasets can be parsed in
a unified and reproducible manner, would enable simpler creation of bespoke KGs


Data Value.
Another questions is whether a single super graph should be created, which attempts to capture all
knowledge around drug discovery, or whether smaller, more task specific, projections enable better
predictions overall.

Better Metadata

Incorporation of Features. Typically many existing KGs are provided as little more than edge
lists, with models trying to make predictions using this relational information alone. Throughout
this review, we have attempted to highlight where data resources may be used to add additional
features for entities and relations.

Our hope is that this review of suitable data sources, combined with recent works evaluating graphspecific machine learning models in the context of drug discovery.

# Comments

## Tags
  - 1.3.2.3. Bio2RDF and semantic databases

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q106327616)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q106327616)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q106327616&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [arXiv ID](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2102.10062.pdf)  
