
An atlas of neural crest lineages along the posterior developing zebrafish at single-cell resolution
==========
  
  [@wikidata:Q106248504]  
  

# Highlights

Neural crest cells (NCCs) are vertebrate stem cells that give rise to various cell types throughout the developing body in early life

We identified several major NCC/NCC-derived cell-types including mesenchyme, neural crest, neural, neuronal, glial, and pigment, from which we resolved over three dozen cellular subtypes.

. Global analysis of NCC derivatives revealed they were demarcated by combinatorial hox gene codes, with distinct profiles within neuronal cells. From these analyses, we present a comprehensive cell-type atlas that can be utilized as a valuable resource for further mechanistic and evolutionary investigations of NCC differentiation.

 Using sox10:GFP+48–50 hpf embryos and 68–70 hpf larvae, we identified eight major classes of cells: mesenchyme, NCC, neural, neuronal, glial, pigment, muscle, and otic. Among the major cell types, we annotated over 40 cellular subtypes

 To identify sox10-expressing and sox10-derived cells along the posterior zebrafish during the embryonic to larval transition, we utilized the transgenic line sox10:GF.

 To assess the proliferative state of sox10:GFP+ cells, we determined their G1, S or G2/M phase occupancy, based on expression of proliferative cell cycle marker genes

 --> Cool.
sox10:GFP+ cells exist in several major cell type categories based on the expression of signature marker genes (Figure 1F,G; Figure 1—figure supplement 2E,F). These major cell type categories included: neural, neuronal, glial, mesenchyme, pigment cell, NCC, otic, and muscle

the sox10:GFP line has been shown to transiently label sensory dorsal root ganglion (DRG) progenitors between the first and second day of zebrafish development

he previously mentioned enteric neuron markers, with the addition of etv1, a recently identified marker of an enteric sensory neuron type, intrinsic primary afferent neurons (IPANs) in mouse (Morarach et al., 2021), were queried and visualized using dot and feature plot. These data indicate that zebrafish differentiating enteric neurons express IPAN gene signatures during their development.

In summary, our study greatly increases foundational understanding of NCC-derived cell fates, as well as other sox10+posterior cell types in zebrafish, thereby complementing ongoing studies in mammalian models and expanding fundamental knowledge of how cells diversify in developing organisms. The spatiotemporal information contained within our zebrafish atlas will serve as a resource for the developmental biology, stem cell, evolutionary biology and organogenesis communities.

--> Nice study.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q106248504)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q106248504)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q106248504/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q106248504&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
