
The cellular immune response to COVID-19 deciphered by single cell multi-omics across three UK centres
======================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q106272047]  
  
Publication date : 15 of January, 2021  

# Highlights

  performed  single-cell  RNA-sequencing  coupled  with  analysis  of 67cell surface proteins, providing molecular profiling of over 800,000 peripheral blood mononuclear 68cells from a cohort of 130 patients with COVID-19.

   Full  single  cell  transcriptomes 73coupled with quantification of 188 cell surface proteins,and T and B lymphocyte antigen receptor 74repertoires have provided several insights into COVID-19: 1. a new non-classical monocyte state 75that  sequesters  platelets  and  replenishes  the  alveolar  macrophage  pool;  2.  platelet  activation 76accompanied   by   early   priming   towards   megakaryopoiesis   in   immature   haematopoietic 77stem/progenitor cells and expansion of megakaryocyte-primed progenitors; 3. increased clonally 78expanded  CD8+effector:effector  memory  T  cells,  and  proliferating  CD4+and  CD8+T  cells  in 79patients withmore severe disease; and 4. relative increase of IgA plasmablasts in asymptomatic 80stages that switches to expansion of IgG plasmablasts and plasma cells, accompanied with higher 81incidence of BCR sharing.


We   generated   single   cell 146transcriptome data from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of all individuals as well as 147a  census  of  cell  surface  proteins  using  a  panel  of  192  antibody  derived  tags  (ADT).

Our  annotation  was  further 160validated using the Azimuth annotation tool for PBMC where more than 50% of the  cells were 161mapped and matched to a unique  cluster in 32/33 of the clusters defined in the Azimuth PBMC 162dataset (proliferating CD8 T cells mapped across two clusters). Clusters unique to our data include 163proliferating monocytes, ILC subpopulations and isotype-specific plasma cells. . (Extended Data 1641E).


We defined 18 cell subsets across the datasets (Fig. 1B), with an additional 27 cell states 159identified  following  sub-clustering  (Fig.  1B,  2A,  3A-B,  4A-B).

Our  complete  COVID-19  peripheral  blood  multi-omic  data  is  available  through  the  web-165portal at https://covid19cellatlas.org.

f the genes identified in this study, we found IFNAR2was both upregulated in 197COVID-19  compared  to  healthy  in  most  circulating  cell  types  and  highly  expressed  by 198plasmablasts, monocytes and DCs (Extended Data 2G). 

 In 214particular, we found an increase in populations of B cells (CD19+/CD20+), plasma cells (CD38+) 215and HSPCs (CD34+) as well as a previously reported remodelling of the myeloid compartment


DC subsets (pDC, ASDC, DC1, DC2, DC3) and several monocyte states (Figs. 2A-B).  Three cell 220states  of  CD14+monocytes  are  present  (proliferating,  classical  CD14+and  activated  CD83+) 

 cells. BAL contains a population of mature, migratory DCs that 255express CCR7and LAMP3but  downregulate  DC-specific  markers  such  as CD1C and CLEC9A 


To further characterise T-lymphocytes during the infection, we re-clustered the T cell compartment 319and identified 15 clusters of CD4 T cells, CD8 T cells, and innate-like T cells including γδ T cells, 320NKT cells, and MAIT cells ac

 Moreover, we observed multiple cell 334populations thatdisplayed non-linear differences across severity phenotypes (proliferating CD4 & 335CD8,  CD8  TE,  CD4  Th1,  CD4  Th17,  CD4  CM,  IL-22+CD4,  Treg),  illustrating  the  complex 336compositional  changes  to  peripheral  T  cells  that  occur  with  COVID-19  severity 
 
 Re also found a large population 378of CD19/CD20-negative plasmablasts, with high expression of the proliferation marker MKI67, as 379well as IgM+, IgG+, and IgA+plasma cells (Figs. 4A-B). 

  is paralleled by the greatest expansion of circulating Tfh cells in asymptomatic 389patients  and  underlined  by  the  strong  correlation  between  cTfh  cells  with  plasma  cells  in 390asymptomatic/mildpatient

inally, we observed disproportionate 461distribution in clonotype size, whether considering expanded or all clonotypes, and increased BCR 462mutation between male and female patients, with greater levels of both in females compared with 463males (Fig. 4J, Extended Data 7B). These differences in clonal expansion of B cells are consistent 464with previous reports of worse outcomes in COVID-19 in males45,46.


## Comments

DAMN, a lot of cells, a lot of PBMC cell types


## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q106272047)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q106272047)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q106272047/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q106272047&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.13.21249725)  
