
FAIR and open multilingual clinical trials in Wikidata and Wikipedia
====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q106235601]  
  
Publication date : 25 of March, 2021  

# Highlights

. By applying metadata expertise through
this project, we will elevate the current amateur development with more stable Linked
Open Data compatibility to English language databases. Using the wiki distribution and
discussion platform to develop the global conversation about data sharing will set good
precedents for the trend of global research collaboration.


By making the data much more accessible and also available for
Wikipedia's style of crowdsourcing, we hope that others will develop and reuse this data
including by linking trials to papers, people, and organizations; visualizing the trials with
charts and maps; general curation of trials by keyword tagging or concept disambiguation;
and language translation of technical terms in structured data collections such as Wikidata.


4. Identify the set of terms and concepts which are necessary to perform and visualize
queries of medical research data, for example, "clinical research sites in a given
country with the highest trial completion rates in infectious disease research"
5. Translate those terms to languages including Hindi, Bengali, and Swahili to the
level of quality which is established as a norm by existing local community
participants in Wikipedia and Wikidata
6. Use Wikipedia and Wikidata's native metrics reporting processes to measure the
impact to users and the engagement of peer reviewers

--> Super cool

Although we believe ./that researchers who currently use clinical trials data will find benefit
from its curation through the Wikipedia platform development process, we also seek to
promote access to this medical information to new audiences both within conventional
analysis about clinical trials and in new and unexpected contexts

My usual talking point with Wikipedia is that it is the most requested, published, accessed,
and consulted source of information in English on nearly every topic, including almost
every topic of general interest in medicine.

This project starts with semi-structured open data in ClinicalTrials.gov which we will map to
Wikidata, thereby making it highly structured, FAIR, and accessible in the Semantic Web
and in multiple languages. Perhaps more significant than our making this data FAIR is our
intent to document our process as a case study to demonstrate how the data was
inaccessible and not FAIR before. Currently, many researchers see ClinicalTrials.gov to be
FAIR and open because they compare it to conventional data management. This project
will demonstrate how much more open this data can be and what networked integration
can accomplish.

--> Yes! Excelent point. 1.2.3. Web of Data and Linked Open Data

# Comments

## Tags
1.2.4. Wikidata and Knowledge Graphs

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q106235601)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q106235601)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q106235601/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q106235601&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
