
Is defining life pointless? Operational definitions at the frontiers of biology
===============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q106876268]  
  
Publication date : 18 of April, 2017  

# Highlights

This paper examines the possible contributions of definitions of life in scientificdomains where such definitions are used most (e.g., Synthetic Biology, Origins of Life,Alife, and Astrobiology). Rather than as classificatory tools for demarcation of nat-ural kinds, we highlight the pragmatic utility of what we calloperational definitionsthat serve as theoretical and epistemic tools in scientific practice.

 More generally, there is no shared position on the importanceof definitions of life in the practice of science (Szostak et al. 2001;Ruiz-Mirazo et al.2010;Tirard et al. 2010;Trifonov 2011,2012;Szostak 2012).

Against the background of diversityof definitions, Edouard Machery recently argued that: “the project of defining life iseither impossible or pointless” (Machery 2012, p. 145).

By analysing the practical utility of definitions of life in scientific practice, wepropose that definitions of life in these domains should be considered in a non-standardand weaker sense, asoperational definitions

--> Operational definitions for cell type, fits - 2.4.4. A pragmatic definition of cell type

Machery’s and Cleland’s criticisms seem to leave no other choice but to abandonthe enterprise of defining life, since definitions cannot provide univocal necessary andsufficient conditions for life. Importantly, however, their criticisms primarily target thecapability of definitionsto mark out natural kinds. We stress that there are other waysto understand the role of definitions by focusing on their uses in scientific practice.

 An alternative approach, advanced byGoodman(1983),Brigandt(2011),and others, invokes a pragmatic or instrumental use of natural kinds as research tools,rather than attempts to establish a unique and best way to classify things in nature, bystressing their practical role over their ontological value.

Rather, we are interested in the concept of lifeas a practical and theoretical target in research that aims to investigate the origin oflife, design life, or address the “salient puzzles about life” (Bedau 1998, p. 125; seealsoWolfe 2014).


 --> Yep, I go in that direction too

 Why should one have a definition of life? (...) A definition of life illustratesan experimental program: once you have the intellectual clarification of thedefinition in front of you—there you have a challenge to implement it in thelaboratory (Luisi 1998, p. 621).According to Luisi’s pragmatic view, definitions are directly related to the aims andgoals of the scientific user, and their ‘success’ is not evaluated in terms of unificationor consensus. Rather, their utility depends on practical purposes, and “one definitionmay be more meaningful than another, depending on what you want to do with it”(Luisi 1998, p. 617)

One example isZepik et al.’s (2001) chemical modelof minimal autopoietic unity (Fig.1), developed to study the relationship betweencompartments and self-maintenance in the prebiotic world (see alsoLuisi 2015). Theexperiments carried out in this work are based on self-producing oleate vesicles, thatconstitute an example of compartmentalised protocell

3.2 Evolving definitions

An important aspect of operational definitions is that they are revisable in response tochallenges, new insights, or criticisms that point to weak spots of the theory on whichthey are based. Definitions, as employed by Luisi and colleagues, have changed overtime following the results of theoretical reflection and experimental researc

Different fields can have different contents and criteria of “practical operationabil-ity” (Luisi 1998), i.e., the actual uses for definitions as tools to guide and inspireexperimental research and theoretical debate

 Our aim is simplyto show that (operational) definitions of lifecan beuseful in 
 scientific practice, byguiding the development of a research program, providing criteria for the evaluationof results, and in generating new lines of investigations.

--> As operational definitions of pretty much anything, I guess.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q106876268)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q106876268)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q106876268/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q106876268&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/S11229-017-1397-9)  
