
Wikidata and the Bibliography of Life
=====================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q106727511]  
  
Publication date : 04 of May, 2021  

# Highlights
 Unlike other disciplines such as biomedicine, the taxonomic community lacks  acentralised, curated literature database (the “bibliography of life”). This paper argues thatWikidata can be that database as it has flexible and sophisticated models of bibliographicinformation, and an active community of people and programs (“bots”) adding, editing, andcurating that information.

 Digitisation greatly increases the accessibility, but not necessarily the discoverability ofcontent. The BHL has scanned volumes for many journals, but unless articles containedwithin those volumes are indexed those articles will be difficult to find.

 nother impediment to discoverability is the widespread taxonomicpractice of using “micro citations”, that is, citing a page or set of pages within a work, ratherthan the work itself (Page, 2009). Experts in a particular group are usually familiar with thesemicro citations, but non-experts may find them challenging to interpret.

 --> That seems actually quite good.

 While the fieldhas some highly visible journals, there is a long tail of taxonomic publication in small, oftenobscure journals.

 Regardless of the meritsof these proposals, they founder when confronted with the practical issue that we don’t havecitable references for many, if not most, species descriptions.
 
 In this paper I make the case for Wikidata as the logical venue for a “bibliography of life”.

a considerableamount of taxonomic literature has already been added by contributors to the WikiCiteproject.


 Data contributions to Wikidata typically come in two forms, manual edits by individual peopleor automated edits by software (“bots”). A number of bots add bibliographic metadatasourced from databases such as PubMed and CrossRef.

 A key motivation for including publications in Wikidata is to provide trustworthy sources ofreferences for statements made in Wikidata.

 igure 9 Plot of number of edits of bibliographic items by user. For the sample of 1000bibliographic items the number of edits by each user is shown. Users are colour-coded bywhether they are bots or people

 --> Cool
 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q106727511)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q106727511)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q106727511/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q106727511&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.04.442638)  
