
Knowledge graphs and wikidata subsetting
========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q106697289]  
  
Publication date : 02 of April, 2021  

# Highlights

In this paper we report the tasks done as part of a Wikidata subsetting project during the
Virtual BioHackathon Europe 2020 and SWAT4(HC)LS 2021, which had already started at
NBDC/DBCLS BioHackathon 2019 in Japan, SWAT4(HC)LS hackathon 2019, and Virtual
COVID-19 BioHackathon 2019. We describe some of approaches we identified to create subsets
and some susbsets from the Life Sciences domain as well as other use cases we also discussed.

We classify the activities in 4 parts: - Describing the subsets: how do we describe what subset
of wikidata we are interested in? - Extraction techniques: which approach can we follow to
extract the subset from wikidata? - Publishing and using the subset: once we have the subset,
how do we publish it so it can be used? - Use cases: what use cases did we identify

WDumper is a tool created by Benno Fünkfstük that generates Wikidata RDF dumps on
demand. The tool is based on Wikidata Toolkit and allows the user to select the desired entities
and properties according to rule patterns, as well as other settings like labels, descriptions,
aliases, sitelinks, etc. Upon request the service creates the RDF dumps which can later be
downloaded.

Using Shape Expressions and Slurp
During validation, ShEx processors can keep track of the triples used for the validation process
and create an RDF dump with them, which will follow the ShEx schema. As an example, given
the ShEx schema of anatomical structure. We may start the validation by using the following
ShapeMap:

As Dan Brickley pointed out during the event, “The nice thing about virtual events over real
events is that it allows instantly reaching out to expertise needed, and for experts on the
matter join. We had several guests that would be almost impossible at a face to face event.”.
See https://twitter.com/andrawaag/status/1350063285287215106.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q106697289)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q106697289)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q106697289&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.37044/OSF.IO/WU9ET)  
