
Systematic tissue annotations of –omics samples by modeling unstructured metadata
=================================================================================
  
 [@wikidata:Q49192555]  
  
Publication date : 11 of May, 2021  

# Highlights
Here, we propose a natural-language-processing-based machine learning approach (NLP-ML) to infer tissue and cell-type annotations for –omics samples based only on their free-text metadata.
Our approach significantly and substantially outperforms an advanced text annotation method (MetaSRA) that uses graph-based reasoning and a baseline method (TAGGER) that annotates text based on exact string matching. 

--> Use of cell ontology as standard for gene expression metadata: - 1.3.1.4. Cell Ontology (and CELDA)


To address this issue, considerable effort has been invested in creating sample metadata hubslike Biosamples (Courtot et al. 2019) where human curators use semi-automated workflows(“ZOOMA” n.d.) to manually annotate samples by assigning them with terms in controlledvocabularies or ontologies (Jupp et al. 2015) such as the Uber-anatomy ontology (Uberon)(Mungall et al. 2012). Others have developed similar web platforms for manual sampleannotation (Quiñones et al. 2020) and explored crowdsourcing to curate sample annotations(Wang et al. 2016; Hadley et al. 2017). The latter efforts are usually case studies and rely on aninterested and available population of individuals to spread out the burden of manual curation.While they often provide high-quality annotations, automated high-throughput methods areneeded to keep up with the scale of available samples, which already totals to more than amillion and continues to grow exponentially

--> Very relevant references for - 3.12 Linked GEO and curation of transcriptomics datasets

To meet this challenge, a number of methods have recently been developed that use naturallanguage processing to computationally infer standardized sample annotations from their textdescriptions (Wang, Lachmann, and Ma’ayan 2019).

A method called MetaSRA also significantly improves upon NER by examining key-value pairsusing graph-based reasoning over the structure of existing ontologies

data/UBERONCL.txt - A text file that maps the model ontology identifiers to plain text

We obtained tissue and cell-type annotations of human gene-expression samples from Lee et.al., 2013 (Lee et al. 2013). In these annotations, the tissues/cell-types were identified usingterms in Brenda Tissue Ontology (BTO). We mapped these annotations to terms in theUBERON ontology (Mungall et al. 2012) that is also extended to contain terms in the CellOntology (CL) (Bard, Rhee, and Ashburner 2005). We chose UBERON and CL because theyare more comprehensive ontologies, agnostic to any specific organism, and updatedcontinuously.


We then manually examined the metadata from these50 samples in a random order for each tissue/cell-type model to evaluate the models’predictions. Correct and incorrect predictions were declared as true positives and falsepositives. Additionally, in the case where a sample’s metadata was too ambiguous to decidewhether the annotation was correct or not, or if the metadata lacked any usable information,these cases were also declared as false positives.

Incorporating dataset-level information to annotate samplesCurrent methods for text-based sample annotation are designed to only use the metadata of aparticular sample without taking advantage of the metadata available for the parent dataset thatthe sample belongs to.

Though the expression-based models and NLP-ML models perform similarly overall (Fig. 6)(median auPRC values of about 0.80 and 0.74, respectively; p = 0.12,Fig. S3), there is highvariability in their relative performances over various tissues based on their training set sizes(Fig. S10,S11).


Though there is growing awareness about the importance of complete and unambiguoussample metadata (Byrd et al. 2020), the millions of human –omics samples that have alreadybeen submitted to databases like NCBI GEO and EBI ArrayExpress are associated withincomplete and unstructured sample descriptions. Here, we propose a new approach, NLP-ML,that combines natural language processing and machine learning to annotate samples to theirtissue of origin solely based on the unstructured text description available for them.

--> Sample metadata identifiers: - 1.3. Knowledge Representation in biology

s

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q106833747)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q106833747)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q106833747/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q106833747&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.10.443525)  
