
APICURON: a database to credit and acknowledge the work of biocurators
======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q106486134]  
  
Publication date : 03 of February, 2021  

# Highlights
APICURON (URL: apicuron.org) is an open resource that tracks and credits the work ofbiocurators across multiple participating knowledgebases. 

APICURON promotes biocurator engagement implementinggamification concepts like badges, medals and leaderboards and at the same time providesa monitoring service for registered resource

Biocurators areidentified through their ORCID. The definition of curation events, scoring systems and rulesfor badges and medals are resource-specific and easily customizable
We believe APICURON willprovide biological knowledgebases with a service to recognize and credit the effort of theirbiocurators, monitor their activity and promote curators engagemen

--> Cool!

Despite its importance, the contribution and effort of biocurators is extremely difficult toacknowledge and quantify​(5)​.


RCID is not designed todirectly manage biocuration activities and it does not provide a system to aggregate andweigh this type of information. The Clinical Interpretation of Variants in Cancer database             (CIViC,​https://civicdb.org/home​)​(17) implemented a sophisticated system which takes intoconsideration biocuration roles. The "​curators​" submit new pieces of evidence while "​editors​"validate new annotations by accepting or rejecting the curators’ work. 


Gamification consists of providing motivational             affordances and “gameful” experiences in non-game related settings. It is meant to supportuser engagement and positive behavioural patterns that lead to an overall increase in the   quality and productivity of users’ activities


The main feature of APICURON is the tracking of biocuration activities or events. A      biocuration event is identified by four fields,​entity​,​activity​,​agentand​timestamp,fulfilling therecommendations provided in​(21)​.n APICURON the​entitycorresponds to the curated dataobject, which is identified by using the identifiers.org resolving system​(22)​. The​activityisthe actual curation activity, such as “entry creation” or “entry invalidation”. Although different        databases can define different activities, those are required to be mappable to PROV termsas defined by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) Provenance Working Group​(23)​.PROV terms,​generation,​revisionand​invalidation, provide a way to define the life cycle of123an object. In APICURON the​agentis the biocurator that has performed the biocurationactivity and it is identified by the ORCID​(14) in order to avoid duplicates or wrongattributions. Finally, the timestamp provides the date and time of the biocuration activity.  

--> Cool! (2)

adgesare based on an absolute count of the activities and represent biocurators milestones or   achievements.
In order to provideflexible and personalized achievements, each partner resource or database can definedifferent rules to assign badges and medals.

 APICURON is a web server which   exposes a REStful API.


All endpoints are to be prefixed with the https://apicuron.org/api.

The curator personal page provides the complete history of the activities, badges and   medals and some biographical information as provided by the ORCID public API.

DisProt is a manually curated database of intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) andregions (IDRs)​(20)​

DisProt tracks curationwork and provides a rudimentary leaderboard, however proper recognition is missing. Here      we showcase how DisProt can value the biocurators’ effort qualitatively and quantitatively  with APICURON. 

The APICURON web interface provides both a biocurator- and resource-centric viewpoint.   Biocurators are identified by their ORCID so that they can report APICURON achievementsin the​curriculum vitae. A robust API allows to integrate APICURON results into third-partyresources and possibly, in the future, directly into ORCID. 



# Comments

## Tags
3.2.2. Community curation and gamified science

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q106486134)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q106486134)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q106486134/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q106486134&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
