
Identification of disease treatment mechanisms through the multiscale interactome
=================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q106637294]  
  
Publication date : 19 of March, 2021  

# Highlights

 We integrate disease-perturbed proteins, drug targets, and biological functions into a multiscale interactome network. We then develop a random walk-based method that captures how drug effects propagate through a hierarchy of biological functions and physical protein-protein interactions.

 We provide a general framework for explaining treatment, even when drugs seem unrelated to the diseases they are recommended for.

 . The multiscale interactome uses the physical interaction network between 17,660 human proteins, which we augment with 9,798 biological functions, in order to fully capture the fundamental biological principles of effective treatments across 1,661 drugs and 840 diseases.

 Fig. 2: The multiscale interactome accurately predicts what drugs treat a disease and systematically identifies proteins and biological functions related to treatment.

 We constructed three alternative multiscale interactomes which explicitly represent cells, tissues, and organs (Supplementary Note 4, Supplementary Fig. 8). In these alternative multiscale interactomes, the nodes and edges in the original multiscale interactome are all present. Additionally, (1) human cells, tissues, and organs are added as additional nodes; (2) edges between these cell, tissue, and organ nodes are added according to relationships defined in established anatomical ontologies; and (3) edges between GO biological function nodes and cell, tissue, and organ nodes are added according to relationships provided in Gene Ontology Plus (GO Plus)105. GO Plus maintains a curated set of relationships between the biological functions in GO and the cell, tissue, and organ nodes present in two key anatomical ontologies: Uberon and the Cell Ontology. We thus constructed three alternative multiscale interactomes incorporating human subsets of Uberon, the Cell Ontology, and both Uberon and the Cell Ontology.

1.
Multiscale Interactome + Uberon: Uberon is an ontology covering anatomical structures in animals106,107. Uberon nodes include tissues (i.e., cardiac muscle tissue UBERON:0001133), organs (i.e., heart UBERON:0000948), and organ systems (i.e., cardiovascular system UBERON:0004535). We utilized GO Plus (i.e., "go-plus.owl”) to link GO biological function nodes present in our original network to Uberon nodes present in a human-specific subset of Uberon (i.e., "subsets/human-view.obo”). Edges between Uberon nodes, which encode anatomical relationships, were also added according to "subsets/human-view.obo”.

2.
Multiscale Interactome + Cell Ontology: The Cell Ontology is an ontology for the representation of in vivo cell types108,109. Nodes consist primarily of cell types and their hierarchical relationships (i.e., epithelial cell CL:0000066, epithelial cell of pancreas CL:0000083, pancreatic A cell CL:0000171). We utilized a human-specific subset of the Cell Ontology previously prepared by the Human Cell Atlas Ontology110. We utilized GO Plus to link GO biological function nodes in our original network to Cell Ontology terms and the Cell Ontology (i.e., "cl-basic.obo”) to link Cell Ontology terms with one another.

3.
Multiscale Interactome + Uberon + Cell Ontology: The Multiscale Interactome + Uberon + Cell Ontology network contains all nodes and edges present in our original network as well as nodes and edges added via GO Plus, Uberon, and Cell Ontology as described above.

 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q106637294)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q106637294)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q106637294&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41467-021-21770-8)  
