
Cell types and ontologies of the Human Cell Atlas
=================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q107373831]  
  
Publication date : 28 of June, 2021  

# Highlights

Massive single-cell profiling efforts have accelerated our discovery of the cellular composition of the human body, while at the same time raising the need to formalise this new knowledge. 
Here, we review current cell ontology efforts to harmonise and integrate different sources of annotations of cell types and states.
We illustrate with examples how a unified ontology can consolidate  and  advance  our  understanding  of  cell  types  across  scientific  communitiesand biological domains

Efforts to implement controlled vocabularies for cell type annotations are already underway, with  the  ontologies  of  cell  types  including  those  from  Cell  Ontology12 and  the DrosophilaAnatomy Ontology13 being increasingly widely used to annotate single-cell transcriptomic data

--> Yeas, reference for "increasingly used"

While these simple categorical definitions may not  reflect  the  often-continuous  and  variable  nature  of  biology  at  the  single-cell  level,  by making  annotated  single-cell  data  findable  and integrable,  they  facilitate  cross-dataset analyses that can provide a more nuanced and statistical view of cell types.

In this Perspective, we discuss the essential utility and key parts of cell ontologies, review the state of current cell ontologies, and conclude with the ongoing efforts and how they can be applied to a variety of use cases over the coming years.

Because the precise terms used for cell types, anatomical structures and diseases often vary greatly across sources, biomedical ontologies, including the cell ontology, typically use a bipartite system of universally resolvable IDs to link official labels and synonyms15.
Critically, using resolvable IDs to  denote  ontology  terms  allows  associated  metadata  (labels,  synonyms,  descriptions  and references)  and  their  relationships  to  evolve  over  time  with  no  cost  for  the  databases  and records that use them.

--> Nice way to put it

Similarly, consistently annotated datasets  allowed cross-tissue meta-analyses forCOVID-19 that  identified  specialised  nasal epithelial  cells  enriched  for  expression  of  SARS-CoV-2  entry  factors24,  identified  covariates such as age, sex and smoking status associated with the entry factor expression in lung and airway cells25, and compared cells in COVID-19 tissues from patient autopsies to healthy and other disease conditions26, again highlighting the necessity and utility of establishing agreed-upon ontological classifications

For example, in addition to a general term for a microglial cell,  the  Cell  Ontology  also  defines,  as  descendants  of  this  class,  immature  and  mature microglial cells, which have the same characteristics as the general class, as well as specific attributes which set them apart as either immature ("microglial cell with a ramified morphology") or mature ("microglial cell with an amoeboid morphology that is capable of cytokine production and  antigen  presentation")

Cell-cycle  states,  on  the  other  hand,  can  be  represented  in  the annotation  system  by  combining  a  Cell  Ontology  term  with  a term from the  Gene  Ontology Cell Cycle Phase terms.

--> Yeah, but how you represent something about that combination?? We need a new class, and it is probably better to have it explicit

To date, the Cell Ontology records lineage and  differentiation  relationships  for  more  than  1,900  cell  types,  connecting  developing  cell types to developing tissues and stages via links to Uberon.

In  some  systems,  such  as  the  retina,  there  is  strong evidence that such features all map to a single ontology, but in other cases different features could in principle lead to different classifications.

--> Hmm, is ontology used in the computational sense here? It sounds a bit metaphysical

The  Cell  Ontology  and  Uberon  are  both  species-neutral  ontologies  with  a  strong  focus  on mammalian  anatomies  and  cell  types,  as  well  as  standard  mechanisms  for  recording  the species applicability of terms.

Practically, Cell Ontology and Uberon are tightly integrated with each other: approximately 1,900 cell types in Cell Ontology are linked by  part  relationships  to the  anatomical  structures  defined  in  Uberon.

The   human   applicable   components   of   Cell   Ontology   and   Uberon   are   under   active development as part of multiple collaborative effort.

The  CCF/HuBMAP  ASCT+B  effort21is  working  with  a  wide  community  of  experts  to  build tables  representing  the  human  anatomy  and  cell  type  terminology  needed  for  annotating scRNA-seq  datasets,  as  well  as  crowdsourcing  markers  for  cell  types.

All  entries  in  these tables are mapped to the Cell Ontology or Uberon where possible, or turned into term requests where  new  terms  are  needed. 

The ASCT+B project is building an expert-validated ontological model of the human vasculature that is feeding back hundreds of new terms and relationships into Uberon.
 
As part of the Cambridge Cell Atlas project (https://www.cambridgecellatlas.org), an effort to 
make  results  from  single-cell  gene  expression  experiments  easily  accessible  to  a  broad 
community  of  users  including  clinicians,  the  Cell  Ontology  is  being  enriched  and  extended 
based on contributions from pathologists and clinicians

Cell ontologies provide a single place to look up cell types for the community. Through this, knowledge  can  be  aggregated  and  standardised  in  an  encyclopaedic  sense.

--> If we need an encyclopedia, why not adopt the model of the world's most popular encyclopedia?

For example, a fine-grained ontological classification  of  human  uterine  cells,  which  was  derived  from  single-cell  and  spatial transcriptomics,   was   utilised   to   interrogate   the   cellular   compositions   for   endometrial adenocarcinomas43, revealing the dominance of SOX9+ epithelial cells which are enriched in the  proliferative  phase,  among  which  the SOX9+LGR5+  subpopulation  is  dramatically expanded in more advanced cancer stages (Fig. 1c)

Many HCA-related resources, such as CAP, have been using the Cell Ontology for de novocell  annotation.  Cell  ontologies  also  serve  other  sources  of  data  by  retrieving  or  delivering ontology-level information.

Whole-body   consequences   of   disease   will   be understandable as well through gene usage differences in cell types throughout the human body. This will thus create opportunities for a new and different kind of quantitative data-driven framework extending and potentially transforming existing ontology efforts.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q107373831)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q107373831)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q107373831/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q107373831&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
