
Search, access, and explore life science nanopublications on the Web
====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q107297395]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2021  

# Highlights

Nanopublications are Resource Description Framework (RDF) graphs encoding
scientific facts extracted from the literature and enriched with provenance and
attribution information.
There are millions of nanopublications currently available on the Web, especially in the life science domain. 
Nevertheless, they are still not widely used by scientists outside specific circles; they are hard to find
and rarely cited

 To this end, we present the NanoWeb
application to seamlessly search, access, explore, and re-use the nanopublications
publicly available on the Web

The scientific world is swiftly becoming data-centric, embracing the principles of the
so-called fourth paradigm of science 

 Fig. 1C presents a small network that shows
the relationships between facts extracted from five different papers published in different
venues at different times that do not cite each other. This is just a hint about how exploring
the nanopublication relation network could lead to finding related concepts and assertions
that might not be explicitly connected in the scientific literature and databases.

--> Good example for - 1.1.3. Interoperable publication processes: nanopublications 

. Although nanopublications are based on
LOD principles, there are still no tools that allow the user to explore their connections
intuitively and discover if and how one assertion is related to others, as we have done in the
example above

Leveraging on the famous data is the new oil metaphor (The Economist,
2017), we can say that with nanopublications we have a vast oil reservoir but no active
refinery, distribution net and machines to put it into use

The website http://nanopub.org/ is the most comprehensive access point to the world of
nanopublications. It collects papers and tools about nanopublications. The central resource
to access millions of publicly available nanopublications is the “nanomonitor”(http://app.
tkuhn.eculture.labs.vu.nl/nanopub-monitor/).

hyis also offers some facilities to allow the users to visually explore the
knowledge graph beyond a given entity by using the so-called knowledge explorer
(McCusker et al., 2017; McCusker et al., 2018); 

NanoWeb is a complementary service rather than a competitor to whyis.

Mons et al. (2011) advocated for the systematic use of nanopublications to encode
scientific facts reported in published papers.

RDF graphs can be interrogated through the powerful but complex SPARQL query
language (Pérez, Arenas & Gutierrez, 2009). SPARQL is not intuitive for end-users since
it presents a complex syntax, far from a natural expression of their information need
(Wu, 2013). It also requires knowledge of the underlying schema of the database, and of the
IRIs used in i

Figure 2 shows the architecture of the NanoWeb system, which consists of the
following areas:
Data creation and update (Fig. 2A):

—Crawler (1): it collects nanopublications from different web sources
Nanopublications are
downloaded and stored in an RDF database (2)
Metadata builder (3): the nanopublications are processed to dereference the URLs and
to get additional metadata;

Document builder (5): The document creation phase occurs after the dereferencing
and enrichment phase.

Every time a new query is issued, BM25 uses the virtual document index to create a
ranking of documents. The document identifiers are used to retrieve the corresponding
graphs, that is, the corresponding nanopublications, from the collection. This list of
nanopublications is then returned to the final user in the same order dictated by the
ranking.
One may argue that this strategy discards information from the graphs. Since each
graph is flattened to a document version of itself, information such as its topology and the
disposition of words among nodes and edges is lost. This is certainly true, and in fact
works such as (Dosso & Silvello, 2020; Elbassuoni & Blanco, 2011; Mass & Sagiv, 2016) do 
not limit themselves to virtual documents, but employ different kinds of heuristics to better
leverage on the topology of the graphs.

 Moreover, the “redundancy of statements in
multiple fora makes it difficult to identify attribution, quality, and provenance”
(Groth, Gibson & Velterop, 2010). Hence, the nanopublication model has been
proposed to quickly identify, search, and access scientific facts extracted from papers.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q107297395)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q107297395)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q107297395/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q107297395&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.7717/PEERJ-CS.335)  
