
Cross-tissue immune cell analysis reveals tissue-specific adaptations and clonal architecture across the human body
===================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q107363182]  
  
Publication date : 28 of April, 2021  

# Highlights

To  aid  systematic  cell  type  identification  we  developed  CellTypist,  a  tool  for  automated  and  accurate  cell  type  annotation.
Using  this  approach  combined  with  manual  curation,  we  28determined   the   tissue   distribution   of   finely   phenotyped   immune   cell   types   and   cell   states.   

This  29revealed  tissue-specific  features  within  cell  subsets,  such  as  a  subtype  of  activated  dendritic  cells  in  30the  airways  (expressing   CSF2RA,  GPR157,  CRLF2) ,   ITGAD -expressing  γδ  T  cells  in  spleen  and  liver,  31and   ITGAX+  splenic  memory  B  cells


Other  populations,  such  as  innate  lymphoid  cells  (ILCs),  43including  NK  cells,  and  non-conventional  (NKT,  MAIT  and  γδ)  T  cells,  have  circulating  counterparts  but  44are   highly   enriched   at   barrier/mucosal  sites. 

After  stringent  quality  control,  we  obtained  a  total  of  78,844  hematopoietic  cells,  with  higher  yields  from  the  lymphoid  tissues  in  all  donors.


 To  address  the  94cellular    heterogeneity    in    our    cross-tissue    study,    we    developed    CellTypist  (https://pypi.org/project/celltypist-dev/),  a  lightweight  classification  pipeline  for  scRNA-seq  data  based  on   an   expandable   cell   type  reference  atlas  assembled  from  multiple  tissues  and  studies.


--> Interesting platform.


Memory  B  cells  in  omentum  and  mesenteric  lymph  nodes  showed  a  bias  towards  IgA1  and  terminal  ileum,  where       197Peyer’s  patches  are  found,  to  both  IgA1  and  IgA2  ( Fig.  3D ).

tissue-restricted  clones  could  represent  a long-term  immunological  memory  maintained  by  long-lived  plasma  cells  resident  in  the  spleen,  liver  and   bone   marrow.   

 Altogether,  this  showcases  how  a  277combination   of   CellTypist-based   automated   annotation,   expert-driven   cluster   analysis   and   TCR  278sequencing   can   synergize   to   dissect   specific   and   functionally   relevant   aspects   of   cell   identity.    

In summary, we describe 15 T/innate cell states in our data by integrating three sources of information:
CellTypist logistic regression models, V(D)J sequencing data and manual inspection. 

Two distinct subsets of γδ T cells across human tissues



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q107363182)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q107363182)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q107363182/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q107363182&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.28.441762)  
