
A Study of the Quality of Wikidata
==================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q107425133]  
  
Publication date : 30 of June, 2021  

# Highlights
We explore three indicators of data quality in Wikidata, basedon: 
1) community consensus on the currently recorded knowledge, assuming that statements that havebeen removed and not added back are implicitly agreed to be of low quality;
2) statements that havebeen deprecated; and 
3) 3) constraint violations in the data

Wikidata aims to allow “plurality of facts” (Möller,Lehmann and Usbeck), and hence it is important that thesefacts are described with high-quality statements. We havelittle understanding of the quality of the knowledge con-tained in Wikidata.

modern hyperre-lational Knowledge Graphs (KGs), like Wikidata or YAGO

Wikidata has a ‘soft’ al-ternative to deletions: deprecating statements to indicateconsensus about the end of their validity. A statement ismarked asdeprecatedin two cases: 1) if it has been su-perseded by another statement, or 2) if it is now known tobe wrong, but was once thought correct.5For example, thecommunity agreed that Pluto ceased to be a planet since13th September, 2006 and hence the claim stating that isdeprecated

In our experiments, we employthe Knowledge Graph ToolKit (KGTK) (Ilievski, Garijo,Chalupsky, Divvala, Yao, Rogers, Li, Liu, Singh, Schwabeand Szekely, 2020), which supports flexible and scalableimports of Wikidata, and supports efficient manipulation oflarge hyperrelational KGs, which is essential for the analysiscarried out by our quality framework

3.1. Are Entities being Deduplicated?

3.2. Can the Community Distinguish Classes fromInstances?


When adding new instances to Wikidata, contributorsmust specify descriptive values for the taxonomy relations ofinstance of (P31)andsubclass of (P279). This fact, togetherwith Wikidata’s fairly wide ontology (containing millions ofclasses) and the difficulty of representing is-a relationships,raises the question: can the community distinguish classesfrom instances? Our analysis of removed statements withobject properties reveals nearly half a million cases whereone of the taxonomic relations has been changed to theother, which point to the fact that the community strugglesto decide whether to use instance-of (P31) or subclass-of(P279) to model inheritance in Wikidata.1

3.4. Are Property Types and Value TypesRespected?Type and value type constraints are similar to the domainand range constraints in Semantic Web languages like OWL,and are covered in resources like YAGO (Tanon et al., 2020)and VerbNet (Schuler, 2005). Many properties in Wikidatahave associated type and value type constraints, as shownin Table 1. Have these constraints been respected by thedata? We observe that only a small portion of the mandatoryconstraints, and a much larger portion of the suggestedconstraints, violate the set constraints


For instance, the propertyvotes received (P1111)requiresother properties likeoffice contested (P541)to be present,which is violated in all 46k cases where it appears.

3.8. Are Constraint Violations Getting Fixed?

Our analysis reveals that Wikidata has millions of deletedstatements and constraint violations. Do these two setsoverlap? We observe that many of the removed statementsviolated a constraint, i.e

Integrate entity linking: 

To prevent introducing duplicate nodes, it would be beneficial to provide suggestions for similar entities when these exist. For instance, if the useris introducing a basketball player named “Michael Jordan” which played for Chicago Bulls, the environment should inform the user that a similar item is already present inWikidata (with idQ41421)

Fix statements retroactively:

Given the large numberof existing constraint violations, it is important to helpthe Wikidata community to fix them. One possibility isto leverage Wikidata’s Distributed games14approach andcreate games to help editors efficiently validate and fix theconstraints.


Recently, Wikidata has started moving beyond individ-ual property constraints, representing a higher-level notion of quality in the form of shapes that are meant to pro-vide norms of well-formedness for sub-graphs describingconcepts of interest (Thornton et al., 2019)


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q107425133)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q107425133)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q107425133/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q107425133&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
