
UVA School of Data Science Open Access Guidelines and Recommendations
=====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q107363272]  
  
Publication date : 03 of February, 2021  

# Highlights
All SDS team members will strive to meet the goals above. In accordance with the SDS
promotion and tenure policy, faculty efforts to achieve these goals will be considered as part of
promotion and tenure review.
Team members will establish a public ORCID ID and Google Scholar Profile containing their
affiliation with SDS and UVA. Links to the ID and profile should be included in materials
provided for promotion or tenure.
In accordance with University Policy RES-001, all team members understand that, with respect
to scholarly and academic works to which the University has ceded ownership, the University
retains the right to use their scholarly and academic works for non-commercial purposes.

Research products other than scholarly and academic works (e.g., protocols, software, and
data) should, to the greatest degree possible, be made open knowledge, subject to any preexisting licensing, technology, and/or confidentiality obligations. 

Unless a waiver or delay has been granted, the final author’s version in digital form should be
provided to the Director of Research Development or deposited directly into Libra Open by the
date of publication or before. Early submission is encouraged as is the submission of other
products of the research such as software and data, subject to the conditions outlined in this
document.
The author will notify the Director of Research Development of which open access repository
will be used and which free license is to be applied to the work. Any conflicts that arise between
the Director and the author as to appropriate home and license for the work will be resolved by
the Senior Associate Dean for Research. The UVA library Libra repository and CC-BY license 
4
will be the default (if permitted by the publisher), with CC-BY-NC also available per the
University’s reserved license under University Policy RES-001.
For Non-peer Reviewed Manuscripts
Authors are free to choose which preprint server they use in alignment with the norms of their
respective work, e.g., BioRxiv for biologically oriented work, MedRxiv for medically oriented
work, ArXiv for computationally oriented work, or the various Center for Open Science preprint
servers. It is the author’s responsibility to deposit the preprint and include details to be used as
part of their annual evaluation.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q107363272)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q107363272)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q107363272&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.18130/TZFC-EC92)  
