
Citizen science and online data: Opportunities and challenges for snake ecology and action against snakebite
============================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q107711867]  
  
Publication date : 01 of July, 2021  

# Highlights

We collected 725,565 photos of 3098 snake species (79.9%), leaving 781 “most wanted” species with no photos.

A total of 107 countries, mostly developed, small, or insular, have all species represented.

• Medically-important venomous snakes have more photos in online databases than other species.

• We provide a list of most wanted species sortable by family, continent, authority, and medical importance.

• We encourage photographers to submit photos and metadata to The Reptile Database, iNaturalist, & HerpMapper.

Range maps for most snake species recently became available (Roll et al., 2017), although changes in taxonomy and the rapid rate of new species description create challenges for scientists wishing to use such resources.

The development of citizen science platforms that emphasize the collection and classification of biological and ecological data (Bonney et al., 2009; Dickinson et al., 2010; Kullenberg and Kasperowski, 2016), including photos, has the potential to reduce this shortfall (Chandler et al., 2017; Goiran and Shine, 2019; Troia and McManamay, 2016). Two major citizen science platforms contribute the vast majority of the publicly-available structured online data on snake distribution and appearance: iNaturalist, which includes snakes as well as all other taxa, and HerpMapper, which is specific to amphibians and reptiles

The development of citizen science platforms that emphasize the collection and classification of biological and ecological data (Bonney et al., 2009; Dickinson et al., 2010; Kullenberg and Kasperowski, 2016), including photos, has the potential to reduce this shortfall (Chandler et al., 2017; Goiran and Shine, 2019; Troia and McManamay, 2016). Two major citizen science platforms contribute the vast majority of the publicly-available structured online data on snake distribution and appearance: iNaturalist, which includes snakes as well as all other taxa, and HerpMapper, which is specific to amphibians and reptiles

Wikimedia Commons is a collection of freely useable media files without a specific biodiversity focus, but which includes many photos of animals. We used the exact process implemented by Marshall et al. (2020a) to query all Reptile Database snake species names and synonyms, discarding page results that did not include the “Articles with ‘species’ microformats” category (for more detail, see http://microformats.org/wiki/species). Because we enforced The Reptile Database taxonomy in our search terms, no correction of taxonomic names was necessary, but we undoubtedly missed a small number of photos that are tagged using e.g., misspelled scientific names or common names only in Wikimedia.

Facebook is home to numerous groups and pages that focus on providing rapid identification of snake photos (Smith et al., 2019), the largest of which includes hundreds of thousands of users and helps to identify hundreds of snake photos per day. Durso et al. (2021a) provided a list of such groups as of 2020. These groups have photo collections of high value. Unfortunately, Facebook no longer supports systematic access via an API that is independent of the user access point

.
We compiled a list of professional herpetologists who we thought might have extensive private snake photo collections. A total of 36 individuals generously provided between 1 and 2132 photos, which were transferred by email or third-party server.  

the USA, Brazil, Mexico, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Nicaragua, Suriname, and Belize have fewer missing species than expected for their diversity 

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q107711867)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q107711867)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q107711867&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TOXCX.2021.100071)  
