
“Lmo-2 interacts with Elf-2 ” On the Meaning of Common Statements in Biomedical Literature
==========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q107297378]  
  

# Highlights

Weshow that an accurate analysis of the semantics ofsuch statements reveals a number of ambiguitiesthat is necessary to take into account in the prac-tice of biomedical ontology engineering.

Statementssuch as “Lmo-2interacts withElf-2” – withLmo-2andElf-2being proteins – occur in biomedicalliterature abstracts with a very high frequency andrepresent, in many cases, the core message of ascientific paper.

Thus rather than being construed asdescribing real world entities by means of logicalexpressions, ontology has been understood as re-lating concepts (i.e. representations of word mean-ings) by means of conceptual relations. On thisassumption, “Lmo-2interacts withElf-2” wouldsimply signify that there is some plausible link-age between the concepts (conceived of as men-tal representations)“Interaction”,“Lmo-2”, and“Elf-2”.

Because of the ambiguities of naturallanguage, a natural language statement like “Lmo-2interacts withElf-2” may have more than onepossible interpretation and thus more than oneformalization in, say, first order predicate logic.

o this end, several top-levelontologies have been devised, such as DOLCE [4],BFO [5], and GOL [6]. These ontologies mainlycoincide in their fundamental division betweencontinuants (endurants, e.g. material objects) andoccurrents (perdurants, e.g.  events, processes).

Continuants are split into independent anddependent ones. Examples of independent contin-uants are material objects and spaces. Dependentcontinuants, on the other hand, are entities whichinhere in something and are thus ontologically de-pendent on their bearer. Examples of dependentcontinuants are masses, colors, and tendencies: Aparticular mass may inhere in a particular mole-cule, a particular color may inhere in a particularflower.

As aprimitive formal relation we introduce the irreflex-ive, non-transitive and asymmetric instantiation relation _inst_ which relates particular entities totheir universal propertie

s scientific laws are meant to range notonly over all present instances of a given kind,but also over all past and future instances and,moreover, also over merely possible instances [9],such a relation is not easily defined

--> Accurate citation, I think I've bookmarked this in my physical copy of the book. 

Furthermore, we make the following ontologicalsubdivision: When we deal with things of a certainkind, we have to distinguish betweenindividualsbelonging to this kind andcollectivesof individ-uals that belong to the same kind [1]. This verynatural ontological distinction, which is mirroredby the singular / plural division in most naturallanguages, must be addressed wherever collectivesor pluralities of individual objects occur. However,this distinction is often obscured when referringto mass entities (e.g. water vs. water molecules).


Is-a(A, B) =def(1) ∀x: (inst(x, A)→inst(x, B))

or instance, “P roteinM oleculeCOLL” de-notes the class of collectives of protein moleculesas well as “Lmo-2COLL” the class of collectivesofLmo-2molecules

--> Cool

Despite this common ground, the sentence remainshighly ambiguous even within a scientific context.First we will discuss interpretations of “Lmo-2in-teracts withElf-2” that interpret it as a report ofevents. Here are some possible interpretations ofthe sample statement that belong to this group:
1. One individual Lmo-2 molecule interacts with one individual Elf-2 molecule.
2. A collection ofLmo-2molecules interacts withone individualElf-2molecule.
3. One individualLmo-2molecule interacts witha collection ofElf-2molecules.
4. A collection ofLmo-2molecules interacts witha collection ofElf-2molecules

But any of these interpretationsis still ambiguous in a very important respect.With each of these interpretations, the speakermay mean either that such interaction(s) did ac-tually happen, or the speaker may mean that themolecules in question have the disposition or thetendency to interact in such a way.

∃l, e:inst(l, Lmo-2)∧(3)inst(e, Elf-2)∧interacts(l, e)

This formalization ensures that there isat leastone individualLmo-2molecule which interactswithat leastone individualElf-2molecule atatleastone instant

Therefore, we will eliminate theinteractsrelation,using the technique introduced by Davidson [10] toquantify over events. This means that we repre-sent the interaction process as an occurrent entityin its own right rather than by the relationinter-actsas in Formulae 3 or 4.

hehas-participantrelation is arelation between a particular occurrent and a par-ticular continuant, in this order.

t does not excludethat other molecules are involved in this very in-teraction process.


As mentioned above, it is important to distinguishbetween individuals of a kind and collectives ofindividuals of that kind.  Rector and Bittner [1]have accounted for this by introducing the formalrelationhas-grainwhich relates a collectivectoeach of its constituents.

Note thathas-grainis a subrelation ofhas-part.As a consequence, we identify a collection as amereological sum of its constituents (regardless oftheir spatiotemporal arrangement), and not as amathematical set.

We do not use thehas-partrelation, because participants in interactionsmay have parts that do not themselves participatein the interaction. ALmo-2molecule, e.g., mayparticipate in an interaction without every of itselectrons being a participant in this interaction.

 Thus, ifwe encounter a plurality of bindings within a plu-rality of molecules, it would not be admissible todescribe this as a binding between two collectivesof molecules but rather a collective of bindings be-tween pairs instances of the kinds of molecules inquestion2. Thus we have to deal with a collectiveof processes rather than with collectives of contin-uants.

A   counterexample   is   the   interaction   betweensolutes  and  solvents  in  a  solution  which  necessarilyinvolves colletives of both solvents and solutes.

 --> That is so clear and yet so ignored. Very elegantly written.

However, messagesof the style “Lmo-2interacts withElf-2” very of-ten do not focus on the accidental occurrence ofan event but are rather meant to express someinherent property of the objects under investiga-tion.

This ambiguity, of course, matches Aristotle‘s fa-mous distinction between act and potency, andAristotle himself observed that “potency” is in it-self an ambiguous term [11].
. We may, of course, notknowall these conditions, but this is an epistemic prob-lem only. A more significant problem is that theremay be infinitely many causally relevant condi-tions that have to be taken into account, and suchan infinite list would be impossible for principledreason. We could try to circumvent this problemby adding (implicitly or explicitly) quantificationphrases like “In all circumstances” or “In somecircumstances”. Theall-phrase, however, will notdo. 

. A usual way to deal with this prob-lem is to introduce a set of standard or normalconditions [15]. In biology, this could mean thatthe “disposition to interact withElf-2molecules”is only ascribed toLmo-2if the interaction com-monly occurs under biological conditions, such asphysiological pH and temperature intervals. Butthe problem is not solved by referring to normalconditions

d,second, biomedical knowledge may also includethe behavior of molecules in non-normal or evenextreme circumstances, like low or high temper-atures, exposure to intensive sunlight or atomicradiations. 

Suppose that we observed a hundredinstances of a given universalUin situations inwhich all conditions necessary for the realizationRof a certain disposition were present, but that inonly fifty casesRhappened, i.e. in only 50 % of allcases the disposition realized itself. There are sev-eral ontological scenarios that would explain thisresult

Assertions of the type “A interacts withB” are generally more than accounts of a singleevent. Rather they refer to a plurality of eventsof the same kind, or an event involving pluralities(collectives) of participants. A universal interpre-tation such as “For each instance ofAthere is aninteraction with some B” can easily be discarded.The need for universal quantifications can be sat-isfied by introducing dispositions: “EveryAhasthe disposition to interact with someB.”  How-ever, not every occurrence of the participation ofsome continuant in some process is proof of theexistence of a related disposition


Now, which one should we choose?One strategy would be to say:  Which strategyyou choose depends on the intended meaning ofthe particular occurrence of the sentence you dealwith.  For text mining purposes, however, thathave to digest large amounts of texts in short pe-riods of time and with as much automatization aspossible, this strategy would be scarcely feasible.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q107297378)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q107297378)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q107297378/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q107297378&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
