
Wikipedia for multilingual COVID-19 vaccine education at scale
==============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q107281306]  
  
Publication date : 17 of June, 2021  

# Highlights
We present the design of a project to develop Wikipedia content on general vaccine safety and the COVID-19 vaccines, specifically. 

Researchers at the School of Data Science at the University of Virginia made this proposalin response to a February 2021 call from a sponsor which was seeking to share publichealth   information   to   respond   globally   to   vaccine   hesitancy   related   to   the   COVID-19vaccines. 

For example, in 2020, theWikipedia Pageviews Analysis report for the "vaccine hesitancy" article in English showeda total of 588,922 pageviews (Fig. 1b). As we will edit multiple articles in a few languages,we   estimate   a   reach   of   at   least   2   million   people   per   year,   all   of   whom   are   specificallysearching for information related to vaccines

Asa university research team that develops medical content in the Wikipedia ecosystem, wepropose   to   serve   this  need   by   enhancing   and   developing   Wikipedia   content   in   multiplelanguages with a global digital reach.2Author-formatted, not peer-reviewed document posted on 17/06/2021. DOI:  https://doi.org/10.3897/arphapreprints.e70280


Wikipedia's 2020 reader metrics show 588,922 requests to the English Wikipedia article for"vaccine   hesitancy",   65,212,508   requests   to   the   204   English   Wikipedia   articles   in"Category: Vaccine hesitancy", and as shown in Fig. 3, there were 1,169,567 requests tothe 30 language versions of Wikipedia articles for vaccine hesitancy. These numbers placethe topic "vaccine hesitancy" within the top 10% of Wikipedia articles by popularity, and weassert   that   these   numbers   would   represent   admirable   results   for   a   media   outreachcampaign of any sort.

Our method is as follows:
1.Curation  - identify key facts to share and make the fact-checking transparent.
2.Editing  - integrate those facts into relevant English Wikipedia articles.
3.Translation  - convert English into the Hindi, Bangla, Urdu, and Nepali Wikipediaversions.
4.Ethics  - address problems we identify and solicit community engagement.5.Documentation    -   publish   our   process   and   demonstrate   impact   with   audiencemetrics.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q107281306)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q107281306)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q107281306&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3897/ARPHAPREPRINTS.E70280)  
