
The Next Big Thing: From Hypermedia to Datuments
================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q107297383]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2004  

# Highlights

We introduce the concept of a datument as a hyperdocument for transmitting and preserving the complete content of a piece of scientific work. Currently the scientific publishing process loses almost all of the information environment that the author creates or possesses

 For "data" it is much less clear and we highlight this concern, without providing complete solutions. "Open", therefore refers to the desire to make information universally available without hindrance on conditions which preserve authors' rights but make it unnecessary to contact the author for responsible re-use.

A feature of many sciences is that information is "micropublished" in many different journals. There are ca 3,000,000 new chemical compounds reported per year but few journals carry more than about 50 in any one article.

create a business for abstraction and curation. A very well-known example (in molecular sciences) is the Chemical Abstracts Service which extracts (by human effort) "every" new reported chemical compound from the public literature. Obviously this is costly and costs must be recovered in per-use charges. The Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre has a similar model. These organisations fill a useful role but their design is fundamentally incompatible with the datuments we propose.
 For example the authors have pioneered e-conferences (Rzepa et al, 1996), e-courses (Murray-Rust et al, 1995) and sit on the board of an innovative e-journal where datuments can be published (Gkoutos et al, 2001). 

sing XSLT stylesheets the robots can answer trivial (chemical) questions like:

    How many nuclear magnetic resonance spectra were published this year? What is the distribution of magnetic field strengths used? What are the solvents used to prepare the samples?

A datument is generally composed of components from many sources. If these sources have any barriers to re-use the distributability and re-use of the datument is very severely limited. Among the barriers are:

    Fees and non-Open licenses of any sort. In general the effort to understand such licenses and honour them takes effort for humans and is beyond machines at present. It is probably a major barrier to the concept of the unbounded semantic web. Robots generally do not have credit cards.
    Login procedures, even if free. The need to provide personal details and spammable emails deters many from accessing certain information sources.
    Unstated copyright. Since documents are presumed by default to carry the copyright of the author until many years after their death, most web-based documents are de facto copyrighted and non-re-usable. A simple statement permitting re-use would be of great value.
    lack of provenance, The data are unattributed and therefore of unknown value. Their semantics may be unknown and therefore misguessed.
    lack of discovery metadata (including provenance). The resource is simply never found.

The protection of intellectual property (IP) on datuments is potentially extremely complex. Creative works are copyrightable but "facts" are not.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q107297383)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q107297383)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q107297383/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q107297383&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
