
Cryopreservation of human cancers conserves tumour heterogeneity for single-cell multi-omics analysis
=====================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q107301506]  
  
Publication date : 10 of May, 2021  

# Highlights

Using the Chromium 10X platform, we sequenced a total of ~ 120,000 cells from fresh and cryopreservedreplicates across three primary breast cancers, two primary prostate cancers and a cutaneous melanoma

In addition, we performed single-cellimmunophenotyping using CITE-Seq on a single breast cancer sample cryopreserved as solid tissue fragments.

 We show that scRNA-Seq results of cells from cryopreserved solid tissue andfrom cryopreserved dissociated cell suspensions are com-parable to those from cells prepared from fresh tissue,with minimal impact on downstream analysis methods.

 In this study, we aimed to examine the effect ofcryopreserving dissociated cells and solid tissue frag-ments from human tumours prior to scRNA-Seq on the10X Chromium platform.

 We examined tissue from three primary breast cancers,two primary prostate cancers and a lymph node metastasisfrom a patient with a cutaneous melanoma (Additional file1). 

Read demultiplexing and alignment to the GRCh38human reference genome was performed using the CellRanger Single Cell Software v2.0 (10X Genomics)

Filtered barcodes frommatched replicates were then processed and integratedusing the Seurat v3 package inRas per the developers’vignettes

ifferential geneexpression was then performed between integrated clus-ter IDs across each of the replicates using the MASTmethod through theFindAllMarkersfunction in Seurat


his revealed atotal of 23 pathways that were unique to cells cryopre-served  as  either  CCS  or  CT.  Five  pathways  wereenriched in cells cryopreserved as CCS (Fig.5a)

--> Nah, maybe

We noticed that cellular stress response pathways suchas heat shock protein binding (GO:0031072) and un-folded protein binding (GO:0051082) were commonlyenriched across CT and CO conditions, which includedseveral heat-shock related genes includingHSPA1A,HSPA1BandHSP90AA1(Additional file6).

--> This I trust

Here, we performed CITE-Seqon a single breast cancer case cryopreserved as CT(Fig.6a) using a panel of 15 canonical cell type markers.

Cryopreservation provides high quality immunophenotyping using CITE-Seq

--> Cool

We show that high-quality scRNA-Seq data can begenerated from human cancer samples cryopreserved asdissociated single-cell suspensions (CCS) and solid tis-sues (CT). 


While we used tissues that hadbeen cryopreserved for up to 6 weeks in this study, wehave routinely processed samples stored at liquid nitro-gen for more than 3 years for scRNA-Seq. 

ue to the easily adoptable nature of cryopreserv-ing solid tissues in tissue biobanking processes, we envis-age our findings to positively impact the sample collectionopportunities for future clinical studies, particularly formulti-site collaborative studies, to allow for the centralisa-tion of sample processing and batched analysis.

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q107301506)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q107301506)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q107301506/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q107301506&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/S13073-021-00885-Z)  
