
Embryo-scale, single-cell spatial transcriptomics
=================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q107398398]  
  
Publication date : 01 of July, 2021  

# Highlights

 The researchers used sci-Space to create a spatial atlas of mouse E14 sagittal sections, revealing spatially expressed genes across cell types. This application illustrates how sci-Space complements existing approaches in spatial genomics.

 Applying sci-Space to developing mouse embryos, we captured approximate spatial coordinates and whole transcriptomes of about 120,000 nuclei. We identify thousands of genes exhibiting anatomically patterned expression, leverage spatial information to annotate cellular subtypes, show that cell types vary substantially in their extent of spatial patterning.


e developed sci-Plex, a method forlabeling or“hashing”nuclei using unmodifiedDNA oligos before single-cell RNA sequenc-ing with combinatorial indexing (sci-RNA-seq)

 To leverage this workflow to capture spa-tial information, we spatially arrayed uniquecombinations of hashing oligos, and then trans-ferred these oligos to nuclei within a tissue sliceby diffusion (17). These hashing oligos, recoveredin association with sci-RNA-seq profiles, captureeach cell’s approximate tissue coordinates uponsequencing.

 We applied sci-Space to profile 14 sagittal sec-tions derived from two embryonic day 14 (E14.0)mouse embryos (C57BL/6N)

  capture of 164 nuclei/mm2of tissueon average, or sampling of 2.2% of the esti-mated nuclei present (fig. S10)

Rather thanannotating cell types ab initio, we co-embedded(19,20) these data with a published, nonspatialsci-RNA-seq mouse organogenesis cell atlasdataset spanning E9.5 to E13.5 (1) and cellsfrom a developing mouse brain atlas (DMBA)spanning E13.5 to E14.5 (21). Reassuringly,these E14.0 data integrated well with bothdatasets (Figs. 1B and fig. S11).

Forexample, a sci-Space“digital in situ”of the do-pamine transporterSlc6a3highlights a clusterof dopaminergic neurons at the midbrain-hindbrain boundary, consistent with stage-and section-matched whole-mount in situ data(27).

A key distinction between sci-Space and STCmethods (fig. S1, left) is that because STC meth-ods capture transcripts from lysed tissue sec-tions (11,12), each spot can include RNA frommultiple cells and/or portions of cells. 

Analogously, we posited that sci-Space datacould serve as a scaffold for the imputationof locations of cells profiled by nonspatialsingle-cell RNA-seq but with the advantageof matching single-cell transcriptomes

However, some cell types’transcriptomes ap-peared more sensitive to spatial position thanothers(Fig.4B).Forexample,chondrocyteswere influenced by position within the embryo,reflecting the ongoingdevelopment of variousconnective tissue lineages at E14.0, and ex-plained at least in part by subclusters that ap-pear to correspond to digit condensates andcraniofacial mesenchyme (Fig. 4C and fig. S31).Other such cell types included neurons andtheir precursors, the radial glia.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q107398398)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q107398398)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q107398398/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q107398398&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.ABB9536)  
