
Anatomical Structures, Cell Types, and Biomarkers Tables Plus 3D Reference Organs in Support of a Human Reference Atlas
=======================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q107363147]  
  
Publication date : 01 of June, 2021  

# Highlights
This paper reviews efforts across 16 international consortia to construct human anatomical structures, cell types, and biomarkers (ASCT+B) tables and three-dimensional reference organs in support of a Human Reference Atlas. 
We detail the ontological descriptions and spatial three-dimensional anatomical representations together with user interfaces that support the registration and exploration of human tissue data. 
Four use cases are presented to demonstrate the utility of ASCT+B tables for advancing biomedical research and improving health.

16 consortia that focus on human atlas construction

For example, different cell types can be assigned using existing ontologies/nomenclatures based on genetic, protein, or other biomarker expression profiles. Rapid progress on single-cell technologies has led to an explosion of cell-type definitions, but no standards exist for the naming of anatomical structures, cell types, and biomarkers across organ systems (but see20). Furthermore, information on what cell types are commonly found in which anatomical structures and what biomarkers best characterize certain cell types is scattered across hundreds of ontologies (e.g., Uberon multi-species anatomy ontology, Foundational Model of Anatomy Ontology [FMA], Cell Ontology [CL], or HUGO Gene Nomenclature) and thousands of publications (e.g., see atlas efforts for brain21, heart22, lung22, and kidney12) on cells identified during human development, disease, and across multiple species.

Over the last 10 months, more than 50 experts—including physicians, surgeons, anatomists, pathologists, experimentalists, and representatives from the various consortia—have agreed on a systematic digital representation of relevant knowledge that can be used to integrate and analyze massive amounts of heterogeneous data. Specifically, experts agreed on a data format and major ontologies to be used to create a ‘Rosetta Stone’ across existing anatomy, cell, and biomarker ontologies. As a proof of concept, experts compiled inventories for 11 major organs (bolded in Fig. 1a and shown in 1b)—listing known anatomical structures (AS), the cell types (CT) they contain, and the biomarkers (B) that are commonly used to characterize CT (e.g., gene, protein, lipid, or metabolic markers)

Results are captured in so-called ASCT+B tables that list and interlink AS, CT, and B entities, their relationships, as well as references to supporting publications.

AS are connected via part_of relationships creating a partonomy tree, CTs are linked via is_arelationships (e.g., T cell is an immune cell), and biomarkers can be of different types indicated by is_a (e.g., gene, protein, lipid, metabolite

--> Not good! Mixing instance of and subclass of. This is a nightmare.

The current ASCT+B v1.0 table format captures the AS partonomy (unlimited number of levels), one level of CT (but see extensive CT typology discussed in127)

Osumi-Sutherland, D., Keays, M., Lein, E.S. & Teichmann, S.A. The Human Cell Atlas: cell types and ontologies. Nat Cell Biol (In Press). 

--> Damn! I need so much to read that.

Like any atlas, a human reference atlas is a collection of maps that capture a 3D reality

For example, they are used to support spatially and semantically explicit registration of new tissue data as well as spatial and semantic search, browsing, and exploration of human tissue data. The HuBMAP Registration User Interface (RUI, Fig. 2a)134 and Exploration User Interface (EUI, Fig. 2b)135 available via the HuBMAP portal136.

Table authors and reviewers can use this online service to upload new tables, examine them visually (see Fig. 2), and compare them to existing master tables. When adopted by publishers and editors, the ASCT+B tables provide objective measures and incentives for computing progress towards a human reference atlas. Power analysis methods can be run to assess the coverage and completeness of cell states and/or types and decide what tissues and cells should be sampled next141 in support of a data-driven experimental design.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q107363147)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q107363147)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q107363147/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q107363147&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446440)  
