
Dysregulation of brain and choroid plexus cell types in severe COVID-19
=======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q108047027]  
  
Publication date : 21 of June, 2021  

# Highlights

Here we profile 65,309 single-nucleus transcriptomes from 30 frontal cortex and choroid plexus samples across 14 control 
individuals (including 1 patient with terminal influenza) and 8 patients with COVID-19. 

We generated 38,217 single-nucleus gene-expression profiles from the medial frontal cortex (8 control individuals and 8 patients with COVID-19) and detected a median of 1,918 genes per nucleus, consistent with recent studies

Fig. 1 | Overview of diverse brain and choroid plexus cell types captured 
from post-mortem tissue from patients with COVID-19.

The highlighted region indicates the consistent upregulation of the antiviral defence gene IFITM3 in choroid and glia 
limitans brain-barrier cells.

We collapsed nuclei into 6 broad cell types, and identified 786 unique 
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) that implicated all major cell types 
(Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 4). DEGs strongly correlated with alternative 
pseudobulk methods (but with greater statistical power (Extended 
Data Fig. 5


Fig. 2 | Brain-barrier inflammation in patients with COVID-19 does not 
require direct replicative infection.

Similar to brain vascular cells, choroid barrier cells robustly expressed several 
genes that are relevant to SARS-CoV-2 brain entry (Fig. 1f, Extended 
Data Fig. 7). We observed a broad upregulation of the antiviral defence 
gene IFITM3 across choroid and glia limitans barrier cells in patients 
with COVID-19, consistent with potential SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Overlap (hypergeometric test) between 
marker genes of Alzheimer’s-disease-associated microglia (DAM, ARM and 
Mic1)4–6 and genes that are upregulated in the microglial cluster associated 
with COVID-19.

We first analysed cortical immune cells, 
which contain mostly microglia but also lesser fractions of perivascular 
macrophages (MRC1+, which encodes macrophage-specific mannose 
receptor CD20634)

To study microglia, we focused on the MRC1−CD247− immune cell 
subset to eliminate confounds from perivascular macrophages and 
T cells

42. Here, by combining sequencing of 65,309 nuclei 
in both the frontal cortex and choroid plexus, along with confirma-
tory immunohistochemistry and RT–qPCR, we reveal several major 
neuropathological mechanisms in severe COVID-19.

--> Basically says that diseased individuals have brain inflammation to some extent

he SCTransform-based integration workflow of Seurat54 was used to 
align data, using default settings. In brief, the integration workflow 
searches for common gene modules (anchors) in cells with similar 
transcriptomes. Individual samples after undergoing quality control 
(described in ‘snRNA-seq quality control’) 

The first 80 (for global object), 30 (choroid plexus) or 25 (specific cell types) 
dimensions were used as inputs into the FindNeighbours, FindClus-
ters (at 0.2 resolution) and RunUMAP functions of Seurat.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q108047027)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q108047027)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q108047027/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q108047027&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-021-03710-0)  
