
Single-nucleus RNA-seq2 reveals functional crosstalk between liver zonation and ploidy
======================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q108127009]  
  
Publication date : 12 of July, 2021  

# Highlights

We use this approach to characterize the transcriptional profile of individual hepatocytes with different levels of ploidy, and have discovered that ploidy states are associated with different metabolic potential, and gene expression in tetraploid mononucleated hepatocytes is conditioned by their position within the hepatic lobule. Our work reveals a remarkable crosstalk between gene dosage and spatial distribution of hepatocytes.


hese functions are mostly performed by parenchymal hepatocytes which constitute about 70% of the liver mass. Liver non-parenchymal cells (NPCs), namely, liver sinusoidal endothelial cells, biliary cells, Kupffer cells, hepatic stellate cells, and immune cell populations constitute the remaining 30% of cell types.

Additionally, visualization of key representative markers such as Cyp27a1, Ppara, and Pck1 for hepatocytes; Sspn, Cmss1, and Epcam for hepatobiliary cells; Plekhg1, Stab2, and Ptprb for endothelial cells; Clec4f, Cd5l, and Slc40a1 for APCs; Bcl2, Skap1, and Gata3 for lymphocytes; and Reln, Ecm1, and Ldb2 for stellate cell showed that transcriptional heterogeneity can be captured from frozen liver tissues for each cell type (Fig. 1G). Higher resolution clustering on non-hepatocytes identified additional three cell types including Epcam-positive epithelial cells (0.73%), and different sub-groups of lymphocytes, including T—(4.00%), Plasma B—(4.61%), and B-cells (4.49%) (Fig. 1D, right; Supp. Fig. 3, Supp. Dataset 3 and Supp. Dataset 4).


For instance, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor α (Ppara) is the most abundant isoform expressed in hepatocytes with key roles in lipid metabolism and displays protective roles against non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)

Across all cell types, the median number of genes detected in 4n nuclei was 1.36-fold higher than in 2n nuclei (Supp. Fig. 6A and “Methods”). In the hepatocyte cluster, a 1.25-fold increase was detected in 4n compared to 2n nuclei (Fig. 3A), most likely due to the increase in cellular volume in 4n which has been associated with an increase in global transcription in larger cells.

In summary, our methodology has the potential to investigate previously archived frozen murine and human samples, and interrogate how changes in gene expression correlate with the development and progression of liver disease, taking into account cellular crosstalk and signaling pathways


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q108127009)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q108127009)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q108127009&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41467-021-24543-5)  
