
Spatially resolved cell atlas of the mouse primary motor cortex by MERFISH
==========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q108840153]  
  
Publication date : 06 of October, 2021  

# Highlights

Understanding how different cell types contribute to brain function, however, requires knowledge of their spatial organization and connectivity, which is not preserved in sequencing-based methods that involve cell dissociation. Here we used a single-cell transcriptome-imaging method, multiplexed error-robust fluorescence in situ hybridization (MERFISH)5, to generate a molecularly defined and spatially resolved cell atlas of the mouse primary motor cortex

The glutamatergic neurons in the cortex are classified by their projection properties into, for example, intratelencephalic (IT) neurons, subcerebral projection neurons (or pyramidal tract neurons) and corticothalamic (CT) projection neurons

However, a high-resolution map of the spatial organization and connectivity of different cell types in the cortex is still lacking.

Here we used MERFISH to identify distinct cell populations and map their spatial organization in the mouse primary motor cortex (MOp). By integrating MERFISH with retrograde labelling, we further revealed the complexity of projection patterns of these molecularly defined cell types.

The composition complexity of the cell neighbourhood increased towards deeper layers (Fig. 1f).

Transcriptomically, the L5 ET, L5/6 NP, L6 CT and L6b subclasses of neurons appeared as discrete cell populations, and each subclass was subdivided into finer clusters with more continuously varying gene expression profiles (Fig. 2a, Extended Data Fig. 6a, b).


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q108840153)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q108840153)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q108840153&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-021-03705-X)  
