
Cellular anatomy of the mouse primary motor cortex
==================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q108840141]  
  
Publication date : 06 of October, 2021  

# Highlights
Here, as part of the collaborative Brain Initiative Cell Census Network (BICCN), we derive a comprehensive cell type-based anatomical description of one exemplar brain structure, the mouse primary motor cortex, upper limb area (MOp-ul)

Computational advances in image processing, machine learning and management of large (terabyte) volume image datasets9, and with the construction of 3D common coordinate framework (CCF) brain atlases that serve as a unified anatomical reference brain for cross-modal data integration10, new datasets will contribute to revealing general organizational principles of brain architecture at all scales.

We derived a comprehensive, projection neuron (PN) type-based wiring diagram of the mouse MOp-ul that will facilitate future analyses of motor control infrastructure across molecular, cellular and systems levels. 


, MOp-ul delineation based on combinatorial Nissl-stained cytoarchitecture (left) (Extended Data Fig. 2) and regional and laminar distributions of AAVretro labelling and Cre expression (middle). A triple-injection strategy was used to further validate distinctive projections of MOp-ul versus adjacent SSp-ul and MOs (right, n = 3 for each injection). 

sity of VGluT1 (also known as Slc17a7)-positive neurons corroborated the transition of L4 and L5 at the MOp–SSp border (Fig. 1a, b, Supplementary Video 2), and VGluT3+ neurons highlighted the MOp-ul–MOs medial border (Fig. 1a, b).

Of note, we found several novel IT typ

We integrated our datasets in CCF to map the output of MOp-ul at regional and cell-type levels. First, we labelled the overall MOp-ul output patterns with PHAL3,13. MOp-ul projects to more than 110 targets in brain and spinal cord, with approximately 60 receiving moderate to dense innervation (Extended Data Figs. 5, 10, Supplementary Information).

Next we mapped brain-wide inputs to MOp at region and cell-type levels from three types of tracing experiments (Fig. 3a, b): (1) injection of CTB (Extended Data Figs. 7, 10, 15) in wild-type mice; (2) injection of Cre-dependent monosynaptic rabies viral tracers in the Cre lines described above plus three interneuron-selective lines (Pvalb, Sst and Vip); and (3) a modified tracing the relationship between input and output (TRIO) strategy combining AAVretro-Cre with monosynaptic rabies viral tracing to reveal inputs to projection target-defined neuron types

In summary, integrated analyses of retrograde tracing experiments revealed a consensus brain-wide input map to MOp-ul (Fig. 3d).


Cell-type atlasing
Cell-type atlasing was performed at the laboratory of P.O. (CSHL).
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q108840141)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q108840141)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q108840141&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-021-03970-W)  
