
A Systems Biology Approach for Hypothesizing the Effect of Genetic Variants on Neuroimaging Features in Alzheimer’s Disease
===========================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q108126839]  
  
Publication date : 23 of March, 2021  

# Highlights

Our approach captures knowledge from the literature pertaining to SNPs and imaging readouts in a causal model encoded in Biological Expression Language (BEL) [16] to support the functional interpretation of SNPs in a clinical context. In a case scenario, we propose KANSL1 as a candidate gene mediating the connection between the genetic variants and hippocampal atrophy. 

Manually generating mechanistic hypotheses by linking genetic variants to neuroimaging markers is a daunting task. Therefore, in order to empower com-puter-aided reasoning, the extracted knowledge ass-embly was encoded in BEL. Both the syntax and semantics of BEL encoded in the knowledge assembly were validated using the PyBEL framework.


 The resulting KANSL1 knowledge assembly was validated using PyBEL [19] and integrated into NeuroMMSig [20]. Finally, NeuroMMSig was then used to investigate the putative role of KANSL1 in neuroimaging feature alteration, namely hippoc-ampal atrophy. 

M4 was derived from M3 and upregulated type 1 signature genes, such as Nkg7 and Ccl5 (Supplementary data 1),
indicating they are immature MAIT1 (MAIT1i).

the issue whether the expansion of Vγ1 + Tγδ17 cells
represents a simple niche ﬁlling or re-direction of their fate at
the progenitor stage.

Lineage differentiation of γδ T cells is highly linked to their
TCR usage. In particular, Tγδ17 cells were mainly composed of
Vγ4 + or Vγ6 + cells. Therefore, we further experimentally
addressed whether TCR alone directs lineage fate determination
of Tγδ17 cells by analyzing Vγ4/6 and Rorc KO mice.


First, there was no proportional expansion of other
minor Tγδ17 cells (Vγ5 and Vγ7, Fig. 5c, pie chart) and, second,
Ki-67 levels of Vγ1 + Vδ6.3 + cells were not increased in Vγ4/6
KO mice (Supplementary Fig. 19A).


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q108126839)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q108126839)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q108126839&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-201397)  
