
Molecular characterization of projection neuron subtypes in the mouse olfactory bulb
====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q108127166]  
  
Publication date : 22 of July, 2021  

# Highlights

Here, we used viral injections into olfactory cortex and fluorescent nucleus sorting to enrich PNs for high-throughput single nucleus and bulk RNA deep sequencing. Transcriptome analysis and RNA in situ hybridization identified distinct mitral and tufted cell populations with characteristic transcription factor network topology, cell adhesion, and excitability-related gene expression.

ORNs expressing the same receptor project axons onto defined spherical structures, glomeruli (Mori and Sakano, 2011), containing a variety of neuropil including the apical dendrites of 10–50 projection neurons (Bartel et al., 2015; Schwarz et al., 2018). Historically, OB projection neurons have been divided into mitral and tufted cells (MCs, TCs), largely based on their soma location and dendritic and axonal projection pattern 

Thus, anatomical projection patterns, in vivo odor responses, and intrinsic properties are known to show substantial variability across different projection neurons

We initially used the combinatorial expression patterns of glutamatergic and previously characterized M/T cell markers (Vglut1, Vglut2, Vglut3, Tbx21, Cdhr1, Thy1) to identify putative OB projection neurons, comprising 23.66% (n = 7504) of all nuclei.

DE analysis for TC type-specific genes identified the transcription factor BarH-like homeobox 2 (Barhl2), the gamma-sarcoglycan Sgcg, the vitamin D receptor (Vdr), and the 
olfactory receptors Olfr110 and Olfr111 as putative T1 markers. 

TFs activity is thought to be organized into coordinated network modules that determine cellular phenotypes (Alexander et al., 2009; Irons and Monk, 2007; Suo et al., 2018)


Finally, we used retrograde viral tracing combined with marker genes to confirm that the molecularly distinct neuronal types we describe indeed project to the olfactory cortex. Based on our analysis, we define three molecularly distinct types of MCs and five distinct types of TCs.


s. More extensive sampling might reveal additional rare cell types, and more fine-grained clustering could further subdivide subtypes of neurons. 

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q108127166)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q108127166)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q108127166&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.7554/ELIFE.65445)  
