
Linking Data and Descriptions on Moths Using the Wikimedia Ecosystem
====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q108393578]  
  
Publication date : 03 of September, 2021  

# Highlights

 Much remains to be understood about moths, which is shown by the many issues within their taxonomy, including being a paraphyletic group and the inability to clearly distinguish them from butterflies

 We present a workflow that integrates crowd-sourced information and images from iNaturalist, with content from GBIF and BHL into the different language editions of Wikipedia. The Wikipedia articles in turn feed information to other sources. Taxon pages on iNaturalist, for example, have an "About" tab, which is fed by the Wikipedia article describing the respective taxon, where the current language of the (iNaturalist) interface fetches the appropriate language version from Wikipedia. This is a nice example of data reuse, which is one of the pillars of FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable) (Wilkinson et al. 2016).

 After consulting Schema E321, the user will find out about Property P183 “endemic_to” and then use that property to state that the species is endemic to New Zealand.

 <!-- Hmm, can use that to update wikidata on taxon2wikipedia -->

 here are approximately 160K+ estimated moth species. This number is equal to the number of moths described in iNaturalist, while Wikidata contains 220K items on moths. As the biggest language edition, the English Wikipedia contains 65K moth articles; other language editions contain far fewer Wikipedia articles. The higher number of items on moths in Wikidata can be partly explained by Wikidata taxon synonyms being treated as distinct taxa.

Wikidata, as a proxy of knowledge on moths, is instrumental in getting them better described in Wikipedia and other (FAIR) sources. While in return, curation in Wikidata happens by a large community. This approach to data modelling has the advantage of allowing multilingual collaboration and iterative extension and improvement over time.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q108393578)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q108393578)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q108393578&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3897/BISS.5.73806)  
 * [Full text URL](https://biss.pensoft.net/article/73806/)  
