
A Literature-Derived Knowledge Graph Augments the Interpretation of Single Cell RNA-seq Datasets
================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q108127390]  
  
Publication date : 10 of June, 2021  

# Highlights

. Here we deployed an NLP framework to objectively quantify associations between a comprehensive set of over 20,000 human protein-coding genes and over 500 cell type terms across over 26 million biomedical documents. The resultant gene-cell type associations (GCAs) are significantly stronger between a curated set of matched cell type-marker pairs than the complementary set of mismatched pairs (Mann Whitney p = 6.15 × 10−76, r = 0.24; cohen’s D = 2.6). Building on this, we developed an augmented annotation algorithm (single cell Annotation via Literature Encoding, or scALE) that leverages GCAs to categorize cell clusters identified in scRNA-seq datasets, and we tested its ability to predict the cellular identity of 133 clusters from nine datasets of human breast, colon, heart, joint, ovary, prostate, skin, and small intestine tissues. 

<!-- Cool stuff -->

While cell type annotation was initially performed via manual inspection of cluster-defining genes (CDGs), there have been a number of algorithms developed recently to automate this process [6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13].
Manual cell type annotation inherently relies on an individual’s knowledge of cellular gene expression profiles.

To create a database of cell types, we first manually curated over 300 cell types into a directed acyclic graph structure. Specifically, each unique cell type corresponds to one node in the graph, which can be connected to one or more parent nodes (i.e., broader cell type categories) and one or more child nodes (i.e., more granular subsets of the given cell type). 

Where applicable, we also manually added aliases or acronyms for each cell type. We merged this manually curated cell graph with the EBI Cell Ontology graph [20,21,22] by mapping identical nodes to each other and preserving all parent child relationships documented in each graph. This merging was needed because there are various cell types which have been identified in the scRNA-seq datasets that we used in this study (e.g., cell types defined by markers or functional states) which have not yet been incorporated into the Cell Ontology graph. 

To perform automated annotation of a given cluster identified from a scRNA-seq dataset using our literature-derived knowledge graph, we established an algorithm (single cell Annotation via Literature Encoding, or scALE) following these steps: (1) identify the top N cluster defining genes (CDGs); (2) compute local scores between these CDGs and all candidate cell types; (3) compute local score vector norms for each candidate cell type; and (4) rank candidate cell types for annotation plausibility based on their vector norms. Each of these steps is described in further detail in the Supplemental Methods.

To benchmark the performance of scALE against existing automated annotation methods, we used SingleR [6] to annotate 142 clusters in ten human datasets which were labeled by scALE as part of our initial set of tuning studies [26,27,28,35,36,37,38,39,40,41]. We ran SingleR using the Blueprint Encode reference data from the celldex package in R [6,86], with the method set to “cluster”, fine.tune set to “TRUE”, and sd.thresh set to 1. 

To confirm that these observations extend beyond the cell types and tissues captured in the studies that we curated, we performed a similar analysis to compare local scores between matched and mismatched gene-cell type pairs from the Panglao database of cell type markers [34]. 

Note that only three candidate cell types are shown here for simplicity, but there were actually over 500 cell types considered (which mapped to 104 cell type priority nodes).

he Literature Knowledge Graph Highlights Uncharacterized Markers of Established Cell Types
The GCAs derived from our knowledge graph can also be leveraged to rapidly and objectively assess the literature support for genes that appear to be cell type markers from any given dataset. For example, we assessed the literature evidence for the top 50 genes overexpressed in retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells relative to all other cells in our reference dataset (Figure 7A). S



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q108127390)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q108127390)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q108127390&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/GENES12060898)  
