
DNA methylation atlas of the mouse brain at single-cell resolution
==================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q108840167]  
  
Publication date : 06 of October, 2021  

# Highlights
Here we carry out a comprehensive assessment of the
epigenomes of mouse brain cell types by applying single-nucleus DNA methylation
sequencing1,2
 to profle 103,982 nuclei (including 95,815 neurons and 8,167
non-neuronal cells) from 45 regions of the mouse cortex, hippocampus, striatum,
pallidum and olfactory areas. We identifed 161 cell clusters with distinct spatial
locations and projection targets.

Using this deep dataset, we constructed an artifcial neural
network model that precisely predicts single neuron cell-type identity and brain area
spatial location.

By combining
multi-omic datasets (DNA methylation, chromatin contacts, and open chromatin)
from single nuclei and annotating the regulatory genome of hundreds of cell types in
the mouse brain, our DNA methylation atlas establishes the epigenetic basis for
neuronal diversity and spatial organization throughout the mouse cerebrum.

Three-level UMAP from
iterative analysis, colour coded as in b–e, panels show an example in which
MSN-D1 neurons are separated into subtypes

We used snmC-seq22
 to profile genome-wide 5mC at single-cell
resolution (Fig. 1a) across the cortex, HIP, striatum and pallidum
(or cerebral nuclei, CNU), and olfactory areas (OLF) (Fig. 1b–e)
using adult male C57BL/6 mice1

c, d, Integration UMAP of the HIP excitatory neurons profiled by
snmC-seq2 (c) and snATAC-seq (d; shows pseudo-cells). e, Overlap score of
a-types and m-types. 


The intratelencephalic (IT) neurons from all cortical regions contain
four major types corresponding to the laminar layers (L2/3, L4, L5
and L6), each of which includes cells from all cortical regions, except
L4, which lack cells from the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and anterior
cingulate area (ACA).


In total, we identified 68 excitatory and 77 inhibitory subtypes
(Fig. 2a, b, Supplementary Table 7). Although there is no one-to-one
correspondence between subtypes and brain regions, individual subtypes show differential regional enrichment 

To further infer the projection targets of cell subtypes, we integrated
our extra-telencephalic (ET) L5 neurons with epi-retro-seq data22.
Epi-retro-seq uses retrograde viral labelling to select neurons projecting to specific brain regions, followed by methylome analysis of
their epigenetic subtypes.

--> That is COOL

. d, Excitatory subtype taxonomy tree.


--> another tree... 

. e, t-SNE of cells analysed by sn-m3C-seq coloured by assigned major cell types.

--> Some neuron types for Wikidata

yer differentiation during development19.
After impact score assignment, each branch of this taxonomy
was associated with multiple transcription factor genes and motifs,
which potentially function in combination to shape cell-type identities24 (Fig. 3e, f). For example, we focused on two brain structures of
interest: the CLA and the EP25,26. At the major-cell-type level, distinct
clusters are marked by Npsr1 (EP) and B3gat2 (CLA)

--> Citing Detlev Arendt: . Arendt, D. et al. The origin and evolution of cell types. Nat. Rev. Genet. 17, 744–757 (2016).


For instance, Bcl11b distinguishes OLF-Exc and IT neurons in the excitatory lineage and distinguishes CGE-Lamp5 and CGE-Vip in the inhibitory
lineage. Similarly, Satb1 separates IT–L4 from IT-L2/3 and MGE from
CGE in excitatory and inhibitory cells. These findings indicate broad
repurposing of transcription factors for cell-type specification among
distinct developmental lineages.

One group (G2) of elements that displayed little diversity in bulk data showed highly specific mCG and open-chromatin signals in MSN–D1/D2 neurons, whereas another group (G3) was specific
to CT–L6 neurons. These two groups of DMRs suggest that possible
alternative regulatory elements are used to regulate the same gene
in different cell types, although further experiments are required to
validate this hypothesis.

he major cell types could be distinguished on UMAP
embedding on the basis of chromosome interaction (Fig. 4e), indicating
the dynamic nature of genome architecture across cell types. Among
the 19,151 chromosome loops, 48.7% showed significantly different
contact frequency between cell types (Fig. 4f)


Notably, the location prediction accuracy of the ANN was higher
than using only the spatial distribution information of subtypes
(overall increased by 38%, Extended Data Fig. 11c), suggesting that
spatial diversity is well-preserved in the neuronal DNA methylome.
We also notice higher levels of errors in location prediction of some
cell types, especially in the cortical MGE and CGE inhibitory neurons
(Fig. 6c, Extended Data Fig. 11c). This finding is consistent with previous transcriptome-based studies19,31,

Overall, our analysis highlights the power of this dataset power for
characterizing cell types using gene activity information from both
coding regions and the regulatory elements in the non-coding regions
of the genome. This comprehensive epigenomic dataset provides a
valuable resource for answering fundamental questions about gene
regulation in specifying cell-type spatial diversity and provides the
raw material to develop new genetic tools for targeting specific cell
types and functional testing.

# Comments

Gosh this is a big article

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q108840167)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q108840167)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q108840167/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q108840167&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-020-03182-8)  
