
Leveraging the Cell Ontology to classify unseen cell types
==========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q108929315]  
  
Publication date : 21 of September, 2021  

# Highlights

Here, we present OnClass, an algorithm and accompanying software for
automatically classifying cells into cell types that are part of the controlled vocabulary that
forms the Cell Ontology.

A key advantage of OnClass is its capability to classify cells into cell
types not present in the training data because it uses the Cell Ontology graph to infer cell
type relationships.

However, utilizing these cell type annotations is challenging due
to the inconsistent terminology used to describe cell types col-
lected by independent groups 3,4,19 .


Furthermore, OnClass can be used to identify marker genes for all the cell
ontology categories, regardless of whether the cell types are present or absent in the training
data, suggesting that OnClass goes beyond a simple annotation tool for single cell datasets,
being the first algorithm capable to identify marker genes specific to all terms of the Cell
Ontology and offering the possibility of refining the Cell Ontology using a data-centric
approach.

However, computationally
assigning cells to terms (i.e., cell types) in the Cell Ontology has at
least two challenges. 

cell type terms are not associated with marker genes,

supervised learning approaches can be used to predict Cell Ontology terms that have
curated annotations, they are unable to classify cells to unseen terms (i.e., terms which do not have any annotated cells in the training data)

This issue is dramatically slowing research by hampering our ability to automatically annotate new datasets that pave the way to fully understanding cellular diversity as more than 95% of cell types in the Cell Ontology are unseen even in the largest datasets19,20,29. 

<!-- Not an introduction, but a result. -->

. Throughout this paper, we refer to “unseen Cell Ontology terms” to describe cell types from the Cell Ontology that do not have any annotated cells in the training data. 

OnClass is able to automatically classify cells to any cell type as long as its corresponding
term is captured in the Cell Ontology, even if this cell type does
not have annotated cells in the training data.

The Cell Ontology is a controlled vocabulary that organizes 2331 cell types anatomically derived into a
hierarchy based on the “is_a” relation25. Each cell type is associated with a text description in the Cell Ontology. OnClass uses
both the Cell Ontology graph and the cell type description to
classify single cells (see “Methods”).

OnClass is a
Python-based open source package able to compute cell type
similarities between the hierarchical structure of existing cell
ontologies, such as the Cell Ontology25 and the Allen
Ontology20,33

 In the first step, we map the user terminology to Cell Ontology terms based on the text embedding similarity using natural language processing (NLP)30. 
 
 Then, in the second step, we embed cell types into a low-dimensional space using the Cell Ontology graph

Moreover, we provide a pre-trained model, which given an input gene expression matrix can predict cell types for millions of cells in a few minutes on a modern server.



Fig. 1 OnClass overview. OnClass first maps user terminology to Cell Ontology terms based on the text embedding similarity. It then embeds cell ontology
terms into a low-dimensional space using the Cell Ontology graph. Single-cell transcriptomes are then projected into the same low-dimensional space
using a nonlinear transformation. Finally, OnClass refines the annotation of each cell by first overlaying confidence scores on the Cell Ontology graph and
then propagating these scores using random walk with restart.
--> Very cool


The text description-based similarity was also used to help users map curated free text annotation to the Cell Ontology (Fig. 1, Supplementary Data 1).



Next, we examined whether cell types that were deemed similar by the Cell Ontology would have similar gene expression profiles. 

Overall, we observed that OnClass outperformed existing approaches (Fig. 2, Supplementary Figs. 4–10).

Existing top-performing methods15 cannot annotate cell types not present in the training dataset, inevitably limiting their usability to aid the cell biology community identifying novel cell types across single-cell transcriptomic datasets. 

We incorporated these OnClass-computed marker genes into our provisional Cell Ontology (Supplementary Data 3), in the hope of facilitating future expert curation. This data is easily accessible through our portal (http://onclass.ds.czbiohub.org) and although these marker genes are by no means a completely accurate representation of cell type features, they are the first attempt at creating a comprehensive knowledge base of marker genes representative of the entire cellular diversity.


Existing top-performing methods15 cannot annotate cell types not present
in the training dataset, inevitably limiting their usability to aid the
cell biology community identifying novel cell types across singlecell transcriptomic datasets. Notably, even though Tabula Muris
Senis is one of the most diverse collections of annotated singlecell transcriptomics profiles, it still only covers less than 5% of all
cell types described in the Cell Ontology.


OnClass is actually the first method that can classify cells into specific unseen cell types.

Inparticular, we trained OnClass on cells from one dataset (training
set) and then used it to classify cells from another dataset (test set).

Given the accurate annotation of both seen and unseen Cell
Ontology terms, we were then interested in using OnClass to
identify marker genes for all the existing Cell Ontology terms.

We incorporated these
OnClass-computed marker genes into our provisional Cell
Ontology (Supplementary Data 3), in the hope of facilitating
future expert curation. This data is easily accessible through our
portal (http://onclass.ds.czbiohub.org) and although these marker
genes are by no means a completely accurate representation of
cell type features, they are the first attempt at creating a comprehensive knowledge base of marker genes representative of the
entire cellular diversity.


More importantly, for those Cell
Ontology terms that have no curated marker genes, OnClasscomputed marker genes also achieved accurate cell type
annotation performance, especially for datasets from the same
species (Fig. 5f). Of note, because the performance of OnClass
depends on the existence of good quality cell annotations
associated with single-cell transcriptomics profiles (Fig. 4f), as
more data becomes available, we anticipate substantial improvement on the identification of robust and accurate marker
gene sets.

 In contrast to existing efforts that utilize the Cell Ontology14,28,37,38 or other ontologies, such as the Disease Ontology39, to improve the classification task, our method is able to classify cells into any cell type within the Cell Ontology, even if such cell type does not have annotated cells in the training set.



Our method takes an important step forward by expanding the set of possible
cell types to the whole Cell Ontology and paving the way toward
automating the process of cell type annotation with accuracy even
for previously unseen Cell Ontology terms. 

One current limitation of using the Cell Ontology is that it was
not developed specifically for scRNA-seq and, therefore, likely
misses cell types and cell states. Although this problem is beyond
the scope of OnClass, an interesting avenue of research is to
pursue such populations by investigating the probability scores
predicted by OnClass.

The marker genes database for mouse is available as
an online web server (http://onclass.ds.czbiohub.org/) and as part
of the package we provided a pre-trained model that can output
cell type annotations for millions of cells in a few minutes on a
modern server.

One current limitation of using the Cell Ontology is that it was not developed specifically for scRNA-seq and, therefore, likely misses cell types and cell states.

In particular, we found that OnClass’ uncertainty in classifying cell types was higher for cell type neighbors that have very close probability scores across all cells. To address this, we propose to extend the current ontology by “inserting” a new node between the two cell types and define it as a new cell population, which was neither seen in the training set nor documented in the Cell Ontology. 

 Another limitation of OnClass is that it cannot distinguish topologically identical unseen cell types, such as siblings with the same parents in the Cell Ontology graph. 

 By leveraging the structure of the cell ontology, OnClass pushes the boundaries of automated cell classification, enabling cell annotation into categories never seen in the training dataset, letting researchers take advantage of large references such as Tabula Muris Senis, the Allen Brain Atlas and the upcoming Human Cell Atlas44.


## Tags
--> Russ Altman Nat Comm - 1.3.1.4. Cell Ontology (and CELDA)

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q108929315)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q108929315)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q108929315&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41467-021-25725-X)  
