
Liquid Publications: Scientific Publications meet the Web
=========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q109829598]  
  
Publication date : 01 of December, 2007  

# Highlights

# Comments
- 1.1.3. Interoperable publication processes: nanopublications 

The world of scientific publications has been largely oblivious to the advent of the Web and to
advances in ICT. Scientific knowledge dissemination is still based on the traditional notion of
“paper” publication and on peer review as quality assessment method.

We propose a paradigm shift in the way scientific knowledge is created, disseminated, evaluated
and maintained. This shift is enabled by the notion of Liquid publications, which are
evolutionary, collaborative, and composable scientific contributions.

--> Both Manubot and pre-prints go in that direction

This is ongoing work. It is an evolution of the paper “Publish and perish: why the current
publication and review model is killing research and wasting your money”ACM Ubiquity 8(3),
Feb 2007. http://www.acm.org/ubiquity/views/v8i03_fabio.html

The Web is becoming the most extensive knowledge repository that ever existed. As examples of 
this trend, it is sufficient to consider the success of Wikipedia, or the upcoming initiatives
 such as Web Science Research Initiative (WSRI)2, and the Faculty of 1000 initiatives

Indeed, software and scientific knowledge are more similar than they may look at a first sight.
They are both complex “artistic” creation of the human mind which are “malleable” in that they
can be modified and adapted (evolved) over time in several (sometimes wrong) directions and
possibly in a collaborative fashion. 


t abstracts the notions of journals and conferences into collections, which are groupings
of publications that can be based on topic and time but also on arbitrary rules

It proposes a radically different evaluation method for publications and for authors, based
on the interest they generate in the community

--> Alt metrics all the way

This model is incredibly inefficient under every perspective, results in a colossal waste of public
funding, and forces researchers worldwide to waste countless hours that could be devoted to
better research (or to have fun with family and friends).

Moreover, and very curiously indeed, research sponsored with public money is given to private publishing companies that profit from 
it and that sell papers

In the mind of many researchers, the goal is not to make contributions, but
to do publications. These researchers tend to work on problems if they are “publishable”, not if
they are useful.
[]
This similarity between knowledge and software is becoming more and more manifest as
knowledge is increasingly available in electronic form. Indeed, we argue that (scientific)
knowledge will follow a similar path to the one opened up by software since its decoupling from
hardware over 50 years ago.

--> nanopubs

Separation of the dissemination, evaluation/recognition, and retrieval aspects. Today,
with a publication, researchers achieve all of them. A publication disseminates the work,
causes recognition for the authors (the peer evaluation recognizes it as quality work), and
makes the paper “visible” in that people can look on papers published in “good”
conferences or journals if they want to find “good” work in a certain area

An example of SKO is this very paper. This version is an evolution of a previous one, it has been
developed collaboratively and posted on the Web so that it could get comments and feedback, and
indeed we did get a lot of it. Early versions have been continuously released. Right now it does
not yet have other material for the simple reason that such material does not exist, but once
available, material such as results of review analysis, presentations, and the like will be available
to complement this paper.

Liquid Journals: Once a set of papers has been identified as worthy of inclusion in a journal,
their liquid version as opposed to their static snapshot is added to the journal. So if a new
version of a paper in a journal is published by the authors, it is now the new version that
belongs to the journal (possibly after some reviewing, the review process is not our concern
in this section - see later)
## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q109829598)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q109829598)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q109829598&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [Full text URL](http://eprints.biblio.unitn.it/1313/)  
