
Recognizing Cell Identity: Classifying cell types in scRNAseq data
==================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q109615707]  
  

# Highlights
r. Thus, defining cell types in scRNAseq data is much more than a matter of identifying clusters of cells that are similar to each other. I

This dissertation presents a set of tools
that we developed or used in cell type annotation in a diverse set of scRNAseq applications
(identifying rare cell types, comparing cell types across conditions, generating automatic
data annotations). The potential of scRNAseq is best realized by generating a well-curated
dataset that everyone in the research community can use and contribute to, and the ability
to classify cells in an automatic manner will enable such efforts in the future.


Cell Type Concept
It is not straightforward to come up with a rigorous, data-driven definition of cell type.
There are multiple theoretical frameworks of cell type definition [8], but the most relevant
one in the context of transcriptional regulation is the self-stabilizing regulatory programs
[9]

--> So nice to be cited! 

Cell types can therefore be thought of as a stable attractor state in a dynamic system [9].

(1) RNA molecules can be
released into the cell suspension during the isolation step. This results in highly expressed,
cell-type-specific genes to be observed at low level in other cell types [37].

2) Not all observed cell barcodes correspond to
viable cells.

Challenges and Methods in Cell Type Annotation
Cell type annotation is the step connecting the processed data to the downstream analysis.
There are two main ways of annotating scRNAseq data: manual annotation and automatic
PREFACE 5
annotation

--> Good take 

Most paper containing scRNAseq datasets do not exhaust
the potential of the data. For example immune receptor reads can be used to reconstruct the
B cell and T cell receptor sequences and further inform clonal relationships between immune
cells [73, 74]. scRNAseq data can also reveal patterns of alternative splicing [75]

 Another example is HuBMAP [79] and is also accompanied by its own cloud analysis pipeline Azimuth [80]. HCA, HuBMAP and another major
data hosting consortium Single Cell Expression Atlas [81] are constructed with communitycontributed data. O


First we provide a simulation study of the noise structure of scRNAseq data in Chapter 1 [87].


# Comments

## Tags

ref for - 1.4.2.3. Cell label identification

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q109615707)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q109615707)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q109615707&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [Full text URL](https://digitalassets.lib.berkeley.edu/etd/ucb/text/Xu_berkeley_0028E_20351.pdf)  
