
Neuroinflammatory astrocyte subtypes in the mouse brain
=======================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q109264954]  
  
Publication date : 19 of August, 2021  

# Highlights
By sequencing ~80,000 astrocytes at single-cell resolution,
we show that inflammation causes a widespread response with subtypes of astrocytes undergoing distinct inflammatory transitions with defined transcriptomic profiles. We also attribute key sub-states of inflammation-induced reactive astrocytes to specific brain regions using spatial transcriptomics and in situ hybridization.

. b, FPKM scatter plots of all analyzed genes of FACS-purified astrocytes comparing saline- to
LPS-injected female mice at 3 h, 24 h and 72 h after injection

--> Nice figure

We next asked if sex-specific gene expression changes occur in
astrocytes during inflammation. We compared transcriptomes of
female and male mice at baseline and 24h after LPS injection.


 In a physiological setting, there were only ten differentially expressed
genes (DEGs) between female and male astrocytes, with most
either Y-linked (for example, Eif2s3y) or X-linked (for example,
Xist) (Extended Data Fig. 7 and Supplementary Table 8), suggesting astrocytes are homogeneous across sexes during normal physiology


. As examples, Far1, Cdh19 and Tsc22d3 were only induced
in female mice (Extended Data Fig. 7 and Supplementary Table 8).
Of note, Tsc22d3 is an X-linked gene that can be induced by glucocorticoids and is ascribed anti-inflammatory properties

--> Nice, demonstration of physiological differences

a Fig. 8e–l).
Because Cluster 4 showed the most unique DEGs, and Cluster
8 was the most well-defined in terms of inflammatory genes and
showed a strong early inflammatory response, we decided to further
investigate them. These two populations represent a small percentage of total cortical astrocytes responding to LPS, and we sought to
determine if they are located in additional central nervous system
(CNS) regions outside the cortex (perhaps in greater abundance)
 That these
Timp1+ astrocytes are present in white matter tracts makes their
investigation in demyelinating diseases like MS of interest as TIMP1
can promote oligodendrocyte differentiation, and Timp1−/− mice
have decreased remyelination capacity

Timp1+ astrocyte
Igtp+ astrocyte 

Many important questions can now be addressed.
Is regional heterogeneity maintained during responses to chronic
infection and disease? Are there species-specific astrocyte inflammatory pathways? We hope that integration of our data with future
scRNA-seq efforts will address these questions.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q109264954)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q109264954)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q109264954&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41593-021-00905-6)  
