
Construction and Usage of a Human Body Common Coordinate Framework Comprising Clinical, Semantic, and Spatial Ontologies
========================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q109755184]  
  
Publication date : 28 of July, 2020  

# Highlights
Multiple laboratories across the United States are collecting tissue specimens from
different organs of donors who vary in sex, age, and body size. Integrating and harmonizing
the data derived from these samples and “mapping” them into a common three-dimensional
(3D) space is a major challenge. The key to making this possible is a “Common Coordinate
Framework” (CCF), which provides a semantically annotated, 3D reference system for the
entire body.

The CCF consists of 
(1) a CCF Clinical Ontology, which provides metadata about
the specimen and donor (the “who”); 
(2) a CCF Semantic Ontology, which describes “what”
part of the body a sample came from and details anatomical structures, cell types, and
biomarkers (ASCT+B); and
 (3) a CCF Spatial Ontology, which indicates “where” a tissue
sample is located in a 3D coordinate system


The complete HuBMAP clinical data—covering more than 100 metadata fields—was reduced to a smaller set of 21 metadata fields
that is relevant for CCF design and usage. The current CCF subset includes demographics
and clinical data (e.g., sex, age, BMI), workflow information (e.g., tissue sample
creation/modification date, donor/organ/tissue ID, specimen/data/assay type), and author
information (e.g., author group/creator). All data is stored in a Neo4J graph database


The existing ontologies have tens of thousands of terms, many of which are out of scope of
HuBMAP’s focus on healthy human adults; examples are concepts for capturing
development and growth, cross-species comparisons, and disease. The CCF Semantic
Ontology is much smaller. For example, the ASCT+B for the kidney has 39 anatomical
structures, 54 cell types, and 81 biomarkers while the spleen features 33 anatomical
structures, 23 cell types, and 42 biomarkers. These subsets can be expanded in the future to
cover new HuBMAP data and use cases. 

--> - 1.3.1.4. Cell Ontology (and CELDA)

I. The data and code presented here is available via the
inaugural HuBMAP Portal release and GitHub repositories for EUI, RUI, and CCF Ontology
[31–33].


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q109755184)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q109755184)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q109755184&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [Full text URL](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2007.14474.pdf)  
