
An Open-Publishing Response to the COVID-19 Infodemic
=====================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q110043564]  
  
Publication date : 17 of September, 2021  

# Highlights

We applied a massive online open publishing approach to this problem using Manubot. Through GitHub, collaborators summarized
and critiqued COVID-19 literature, creating a review manuscript. Manubot automatically compiled citation information
for referenced preprints, journal publications, websites, and clinical trials

While many efforts from the computational community have
focused on mining COVID-19 literature, our project illustrates the power of open publishing to organize both technical and
non-technical scientists to aggregate and disseminate information in response to an evolving crisis.

e selected Manubot because it offers several advantages over comparable collaborative writing
platforms such as Authorea, Overleaf, Google Docs, Word Online, or wikis [19]. Citation-by-identifier ensures consistent reference metadata standards that would be difficult to maintain manually in a manuscript with dozens of authors and over 1,500 citations. Manubot’s pull requestbased contribution model balances the goals of making the project open to everyone and maintaining scientific accuracy. All contributions are reviewed, discussed, and formally approved on GitHub before text updates appear in the public-facing manuscript7

Such efforts in biology often rely on What You See Is What You Get tools such as Google Docs,
despite the significant limitations of these platforms in the face of excessive publication.

Applying Manubot’s existing capabilities allowed us to
confront several challenges common in large-scale collaborations, such as maintaining a record of contributions
that allowed us to allocate credit appropriately or to contact the original author if questions arose.

Zotero did not support clinical trial
identifiers and could not extract relevant metadata from
their URLs. In order to pull clinical trial metadata associated into Manubot, we added Zotero support for these
identifiers. To achieve this, we query clinicaltrials.gov to
retrieve XML metadata associated with each identifier
using JavaScript18. This extension enables citing a trial as
@clinicaltrials:NCT04280705 instead of the URL.

Figure 4: User contributions to the manuscript text over
time. The dot size indicates the number of words added or
edited each month since March 2020. The figure does not
depict other types of author contributions such as literature
summaries, pull request review, visualization, or software.

--> Super figure! Makes it clear how I haven't contributed much though :(

Manubot’s bibliographic management capabilities
were critical because the amount of relevant literature
published far outstripped what we had anticipated at
the beginning of the project.

Finally, the preliminary addition of LaTeX
output is useful for researchers from computational fields
who submit papers in TeX format and removes the step
of reformatting markdown prior to submission.



# Comments

## Tags
    - 1.1.3. Interoperable publication processes (nanopublications) 

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q110043564)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q110043564)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q110043564&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [Full text URL](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2109.08633.pdf)  
