
BERN2: an advanced neural biomedical named entity recognition and normalization tool
====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q110599785]  
  
Publication date : 06 of January, 2022  

# Highlights

In biomedical natural language processing, named entity recognition (NER) and named entity
normalization (NEN) are key tasks that enable the automatic extraction of biomedical entities (e.g., diseases
and chemicals) from the ever-growing biomedical literature

We hope that our tool can help annotate large-scale biomedical texts more accurately for various tasks such as biomedical knowledge graph construction.

Table 1. Comparison between off-the-shelf NER tools and BERN2. Supporting
types are denoted as: gene (Ge), disease (Di), chemical (Ch), species (Sp),
mutation (Mu), cell line (CL), and cell type (CT). ML: Machine Learning.
Latency measures the average time to annotate one abstract (sec/abstract)

--> Only one with support for cell types!!     - 1.1.1. Literature Based Discovery, hidden knowledge and text-mining:

When a PMID is given, BERN2 returns a cached annotation from
its database if possible. Otherwise, BERN2 takes the plain text of the
PMID from PubMed and annotates it. 

For example, the NEN models will
normalize a recognized chemical name ‘arginine’ into ‘MeSH:D001120.’

As shown in Table 2, BERN2 offers RESTful APIs to allow users to get annotation results for plain texts or PMIDs in a programmable way.

--> Nice! 

According to Wang et al. (2019), multi-task learning (MTL) often performs better than single-task learning (STL) on biomedical named entity
recognition (NER). It is because MTL allows the model to share information such as word semantics across different tasks.

As BERN2 supports much more entity types than BERN (5 vs. 9 types), overlapping entities appear
more frequently. Based on the motivation that entities with CUIs are more informative than those without CUI (i.e., CUI-less), we add another decision
rule where entities that are normalized is preferred than entities that are not normalized. Annotation results always include mutation entities recognized
by TmVar2.0 (Wei et al., 2018).
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q110599785)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q110599785)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q110599785&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [Full text URL](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2201.02080.pdf)  
 * [arXiv ID](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2201.02080.pdf)  
