
A Simple Standard for Sharing Ontological Mappings (SSSOM)
==========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q110123027]  
  
Publication date : 15 of December, 2021  

# Highlights

For example, are two terms equivalent or merely related? Are they
narrow or broad matches? Or are they associated in some other way? Such relationships
between the mapped terms are often not documented, which leads to incorrect assumptions
and makes them hard to use in scenarios that require a high degree of precision (such as
diagnostics or risk prediction)

We have developed the Simple Standard for Sharing Ontological Mappings (SSSOM) which
addresses these problems by:
1. Introducing a machine-readable and extensible vocabulary to describe metadata that
makes imprecision, inaccuracy and incompleteness in mappings explicit.
2. Defining an easy to use simple table-based format that can be integrated into existing
data science pipelines without the need to parse or query ontologies, and that
integrates seamlessly with Linked Data standards.
3. Implementing open and community-driven collaborative workflows that are designed
to evolve the standard continuously to address changing requirements and mapping
practices.
4. Providing reference tools and software libraries for working with the standard.

ven with this simplified example, it is
possible to see a range of mapping types, and that providing information about each mapping is
crucial to understanding the bigger picture

Feature Why Examples Negative example
Explicit
relationship
types
Applications that
demand highly
accurate results
require mapping
relations with explicit
precision and
semantics
EC:2.2.1.2 exactMatch
GO:0004801
(transaldolase activity)
Two-column file that
maps FMA ‘limb’ to
Uberon ‘limb’, hiding
differences in
species-specificity

--> nice table

. In this paper, we present SSSOM, a Simple Standard for Sharing Ontological
Mappings (pronounced “sessom” or S.S.S.O.M). SSSOM’s goals are:

For maximum
transparency we recommend the use of ORCID CURIEs (13), ROR IDs (14) for
organizations and Wikidata IDs (15)

In our vision for the publication of terminological mappings, related mapping sets are
collected and even maintained as part of a mapping commons. A mapping commons is a
public registry that enables users to find mappings for a clearly defined use case such as
“cross-species phenotype mappings” or ”disease mappings”

Use Case 4: Finding and using mappings in EOSC-Life
The EOSC-Life project (https://www.eosc-life.eu/) brings together the 13 Biological and
Medical ESFRI research infrastructures to create an open collaborative space for digital
biology in Europe.

appings have no (global) context. There are many mapping scenarios, especially in the
clinical domain, where mappings only hold under a range of applicability criteria. For
example, we could say that “UBERON:0002101 (metazoan limb) is equivalent to
XAO:0003027 (xenopus limb) under the assumption that taxon constraints are ignored

The alternative would have been to introduce
additional syntax (e.g. !skos:exactMatch) or additional predicates like
“example:notExactMatch”. The former solution (!skos:exactMatch) is a violation of the
“simplicity” requirement because it introduces the need to handle special syntax on the user
side.

SSSOM addresses these shortcomings by providing a rich vocabulary for describing
mapping metadata, being entirely community-driven with sustainable governance processes
in place, and promoting a very simple tabular format for the dissemination of mappings that
can be easily integrated in typical data science workflows

--> Sounds good, but I do not know how it will managed to get used

es. Analogously to the 5-Star deployment scheme for Linked Data
developed by Sir Tim Berners-Lee (https://www.w3.org/2011/gld/wiki/5_Star_Linked_Data),
we are developing a 5-Star scheme for rating mappings (83)



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q110123027)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q110123027)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q110123027&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
