
Single-cell dissection of the human brain vasculature
=====================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q111441182]  
  
Publication date : 14 of February, 2022  

# Highlights


We capture 16,681 cerebrovascular nuclei across 11 subtypes, including endothelial cells, mural cells and three distinct subtypes of perivascular fibroblast along the vasculature.
We uncover human-specific expression patterns along the arteriovenous axis and determine previously uncharacterized cell-type-specific markers.

 Our study highlights the unique cell-type-specific and species-specific characteristics in humans and provides a framework for mechanistic dissection of pathological state dysfunctions.

To address this challenge, we developed a blood vessel enrichment (BVE) protocol (Fig. 1a, top) to enrich for human vascular cell types from fresh and frozen brain tissue for single-cell applications by dextran-based density ultracentrifugation

We distinguished 11 subtypes of vascular cells (Fig. 1c, d), including (ex vivo/in silico): 3 subtypes of endothelial cells (n = 2,217/4,345); 5 subtypes of mural cells (n = 1,982/3,980), including 1,564/3,358 pericytes and 418/622 smooth muscle cells (SMCs); and 3 subtypes of perivascular fibroblasts (n = 793/3,364). 

In addition, we identified markers for subtypes of these cells, separating endothelial cells into arteriole (VEGFC and ARL15), capillary (MFSD2A and SLC7A5) and venule (TSHZ2 and ADGRG6), mural cells into arteriolar SMC (aSMC) (ACTA2 and MYH11), venular SMC (vSMC) (MYOCD and CD74) and pericytes (GRM8 and PDGFRB), and fibroblasts into type I (ABCA10 and FBLN1), type II (TRPM3 and MYRIP) and type III (KCNMA1 and SLC4A4).

Several of these marker genes, including ARL15, TSHZ2, GRM8 and TRPM3, have not previously been identified for cerebrovascular cell types

Whereas endothelial cells and SMCs showed no significant differences in cell-type proportions, pericytes and type II fibroblasts showed differential proportions (Extended Data Fig. 3f).


Brain endothelial cells show phenotypic zonation4 along the arteriovenous axis.


We found 1,802 genes that exhibited a gradient of expression along the arteriovenous axis, including 147 transcription factors and 76 transporters (Extended Data Fig. 4a, b), indicating a gradual transcriptional continuum (Fig. 3a, b). We found that human zonation (Fig. 3b) was conserved in a previous mouse dataset4


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q111441182)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q111441182)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q111441182&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-022-04521-7)  
