
PAROT: Translating natural language to SPARQL
=============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q111308045]  
  
Publication date : 01 of August, 2021  

# Highlights
This research addresses
the above mentioned key challenges by introducing the following key
concepts:
1. Design a lexicon that is able:
• To fully represent the vocabulary of the underlying knowledge
base therefore helping in resolving word ambiguities that exist in
the user’s query.
• To tag adjective entities in the knowledge base with their positive
and negative scalars. Through this we are able to resolve the
problem of opposing scalar adjectives when converting NL to
SPARQL.
2. We develop a number of high coverage syntactic heuristics which
can convert different scenarios of possible questions to correct
SPARQL queries.
From the evaluation, the developed technique outperforms gAnswer
(Zhao et al., 2017), which was the top performing tool in QALD-9
challenge (Usbeck, Gusmita, Saleem, & Ngomo, 2018).


esearch in Hao et al. (2017) applies a
bidirectional long short term memory(LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmid­
huber, 1997) network to convert NL to SPARQL. Bidirectional LSTM is
employed to capture the context of a word in relation to both the words
before and after it. Their technique exploits the top key words in the
submitted user question to extract candidate answers from the knowl­
edge base. The words are then linked to the correct answer tokens by
learning their relatedness.


A target (or projection) word is a
variable that will be placed directly after SELECT key word in a SPARQL
query. To help in identifying target words in a user submitted query, we
use a typed dependency parser such as Stanford typed dependency
parser (Marneffe & Manning, 2015).

Targets in Wh based queries
This category is composed of queries which start with Wh (i.e. what,
when, where, who, whom, which, whose, why, and how).

To flag out target words in a non-Wh queries, we use the functions in
Eq. 3 and 4. Eq. (3a) and (3b) applies in a non-Wh query that the direct
object is not connected to a preposition such as Give me all the rivers that
traverse Mississippi (see dependency diagram in Fig. 3).


onsider the user query Which female actor played in Casablanca and is
married to a writer born in Rome?, based on the rule in Eq. (5a), the query
is marked as a compound sentence. The query is therefore broken into
two simple sentences i.e.
s 1 = Which female actor played in Casablanca
s 2 =Which female actor is married to a writer born in Rome.
cc = And

To develop this kind of a lexicon, we adopted lemon (Lexical Model
for Ontologies) (McCrae, Spohr, & Cimiano, 2011) which is a model for
lexicons that are machine readable. It allows information to be repre­
sented relative to the underlying ontology

Structure:

SELECT?target1?target2 …?targetn
WHERE {
Ontology triples
} Modifiers

For each unique noun X that appears in the subject position of the
ontology triple, we add the triple ∠?x〉 ∠rdf : type〉 ∠X〉 and replace the
all the subsequent noun X in the ontology triples with ∠?x〉. Therefore,
the triple ontology triples in Listing 10 is expanded to Listing 11.

Positive scalar adjective:

SELECT DINSTINCT?target_1?target_2…?target_n
{
ontology triples
}
ORDER BY DESC(∠object〉 of NN) LIMIT 1

handle the negation part of the user query, we extract the target
words (subjects) in it using the functions in discussed in Section 3.1. For
each noun identified, using the lexicon, it is mapped to a corresponding
term in the underlying ontology. We then extract its most general triple
in the ontology. From this general triple we MINUS the triples generated
by the positive form of the query.

PAROT is a NL to SPARQL tool. It has the ability to handle com­
pound, negation, numbered list and scalar adjective based questions in
addition to other questions.



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q111308045)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q111308045)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q111308045&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ESWA.2021.114712)  
