
SPARQLing Database Queries from Intermediate Question Decompositions
====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q111308502]  
  
Publication date : 13 of September, 2021  

# Highlights

Our pipeline consists
of two parts: a neural semantic parser that con-
verts natural language questions into the in-
termediate representations and a non-trainable
transpiler to the SPARQL query language (a
standard language for accessing knowledge
graphs and semantic web).

The Spider dataset was
created by 11 Yale students proficient in SQL, and
it is difficult to scale such a process up.

Overall map of our approach: we feed a question and a database schema into the encoder-decoder model
to obtain the grounded QDMR. The grounded QDMR is then fed into our QDMR-to-SPARQL translator to obtain
an executable SPARQL query. The generated query is executed on the database in the RDF format.

Which teachers work in NY?
Show the names in alphabetical order.

#1 SELECT[teacher]
#2 PROJECT[teacher.Name, #1]
#3 PROJECT[school.State, #1]
#4 COMPARATIVE[#2, #3, = NY]
#5 SORT[#4, #4, asc]

Question Decomposition Meaning Representation
(QDMR) introduced by Wolfson et al. (2020) is an
intermediate format between a question in a natu-
ral language (tested in English) and an executable
query in some formal query language

We work with QDMR logical forms (LF), which
can be automatically obtained from the text-based
QMDRs, e.g., with the rule-based method of Wolf-
son et al. (2020).

We implemented a translator from a grounded
QDMR LF into SPARQL

SPARQL. SPARQL was used in several lines
of work on semantic parsing for querying knowl-
edge bases. The SEMPRE system of Berant et al.
(2013) relied on SPARQL to execute logical forms
on the Freebase knowledge base. Yih et al. (2016)
and Talmor and Berant (2018) created the We-
bQuestions and ComplexWebQuestions datasets,
respecively, where annotations were provided in
the form of SPARQL queries. A series of chal-
lenges on Question Answering over Linked Data
Challenge, QALD (Lopez et al., 2013), and the LC-
QuAD datasets (Trivedi et al., 2017; Dubey et al.,
2019) targeted the generation of SPARQL queries
directly. Our paper is different from these lines of
work as we rely on supervision via QDMRs and
not SPARQL directly.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q111308502)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q111308502)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q111308502&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [Full text URL](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2109.06162.pdf)  
 * [arXiv ID](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2109.06162.pdf)  
