
Sphingolipids control dermal fibroblast heterogeneity
=====================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q111649631]  
  
Publication date : 15 of April, 2022  

# Highlights
. With the development of lipidomics, we can now
understand the lipid compositional complexity of cells and start making sense of lipidome
dynamics. Lipidomes indeed vary among cell
types and are reprogrammed in differentiation
events. However, whether and how lipidome
remodeling assists changes in cell identity is not understood.


We coupled high-resolution mass
spectrometry imaging and single-cell mRNA
sequencing to resolve both lipidomes and
transcriptomes of individual dermal fibroblasts

We also found that lipid
composition and signaling pathways are wired
in self-sustained circuits that account for the
metabolic and transcriptional fibroblast heterogeneity.


By studying the lipid composition of individual cells, we found that
lipids play a driving role in the determination of cell states.

The division of labor is a fundamental
organizational principle of multicellular
organisms that is implemented through
transcriptional programs resulting in cell
types. However, phenotypic heterogeneity
can occur across cells of the same type, resulting in different cell states (1–3). These varying
cell states can have physiological significance
such as priming diverging differentiation programs (4) or contributing to distinct cellular
tasks in physiological processes (5).


We performed space-resolved (25 to 50 mm2
pixel size) MALDI-MSI on low-passage primary
dermal human fibroblasts (dHFs)

Mass images showing the spatial distribution of
sphingolipid precursors (Cers and HexCers)
and complex sphingolipids (Gb3s and
Gb4s) composed of different backbones
(34:1, 42:1, and 42:2). Miniatures in
the top left corner of each image depict
a simplified schematic of the lipid
structure (compare with fig. S2A).
Scale bar, 500 mm.

3. Identification of dHF lipotypes
by MALDI-MSI and toxin staining
We categorized dHFs depending on their
sphingolipid configurations into ChTxB+
,
ShTxB1a+
, ShTxB2e+
, ShTxB1a+
/2e+
, triple+
,
and “other” (accounting for all other configurations) (fig. S3A).

On the basis of these results, we conclude
that dHFs exist in metastable sphingolipid
metabolic configurations (Fig. 3L) that correspond to given phenotypic states and persist
during cell generations. Hereafter, we refer to
these lipid metabolic states as lipotypes

We surveyed whether lipotypes are the result
of cell state–specific transcriptional programs
that involve lipid-metabolizing enzymes. Unexpectedly, when the expression of genes encoding sphingolipid enzymes and accessory
factors was visualized on the UMAP embedding, none of them showed a cell state–
specific localization (fig. S8A)

Furthermore, considering both the ubiquity
of lipids and their structural diversity, we expect to find other cell types exploiting regulatory strategies analogous to the one that we
discovered. By extension, one can hypothesize
that lipidome remodeling participates in tissue patterning and organogenesis.



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q111649631)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q111649631)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q111649631&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.ABH1623)  
