
The Tabula Sapiens: A multiple-organ, single-cell transcriptomic atlas of humans

==========
  [@wikidata:Q111985889]  
  

# Highlights

We created a human reference atlas comprising nearly 500,000 cells from 24 different tissues and organs, many from the same donor. This atlas enabled molecular characterization of more than 400 cell types, their distribution across tissues, and tissue-specific variation in gene expression.

We collected multiple tissues from individual human donors (designated TSP1 to TSP15) and performed coordinated single-cell transcriptome analysis on live cells (12). 

To characterize the relationship between transcriptome data and conventional histologic analysis, a team of pathologists analyzed hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)–stained sections prepared from nine tissues from donor TSP2 and 13 tissues from donor TSP14 (14). Cells were identified by morphology and classified broadly into epithelial, endothelial, immune, and stromal compartments as well as rarely detected peripheral nervous system (PNS) cell types. (Fig. 2A). These classifications were used to estimate the relative abundances of cell types across the four compartments and to estimate the uncertainties in these abundances resulting from spatial heterogeneity of each tissue type (Fig. 2B and fig. S8).

C) Expression levels of tissue-specific endothelial markers, shown as violin plots, in the entire dataset. Many of the markers are highly tissue specific and typically were derived from multiple donors, as follows: bladder (3 donors), eye (2), fat (2), heart (1), liver (2), lung (3), mammary (1), muscle (4), pancreas (2), prostate (2), salivary gland (2), skin (2), thymus (2), tongue (2), uterus (1), and vasculature (2). A detailed donor-tissue breakdown is available in table S2

These data recapitulate tissue-specific vascular markers, such as LCN1 (tear lipocalin) in the eye, ABCG2 (transporter at the blood-testis barrier) in the prostate, and OIT3 (oncoprotein-induced transcript 3) in the liver.

These data recapitulate tissue-specific vascular markers, such as LCN1 (tear lipocalin) in the eye, ABCG2 (transporter at the blood-testis barrier) in the prostate, and OIT3 (oncoprotein-induced transcript 3) in the liver.

Endothelial cell subtypes with tissue-specific gene expression programs

Alternative splice variants are cell type specific
We used SICILIAN (20) to identify alternative splice junctions in Tabula Sapiens using both 10× and smart-seq2 sequencing technologies and found a total of 955,785 junctions (fig. S14, A to E, and table S7). Of these, 217,855 were previously annotated, so our data provide independent validation of 61% of the total junctions cataloged in the entire RefSeq database.

Hundreds of splice variants are used in a highly cell type–specific fashion; these can be explored in the cellxgene browser (14), which uses a statistic called SpliZ (22). We focus on two examples of cell type–specific splicing of two well-studied genes: MYL6 and CD47. Similar cell type–specific splice usage was also observed with TPM1, TPM2, and ATP5F1C, three other genes with well-characterized splice variants (fig. S15).

<!-- Very hard to organize this knowledge about splice variants! Modelling required. -->

Unexpected spatial variation in the microbiome
The Tabula Sapiens provided an opportunity to densely and directly sample the human microbiome throughout the gastrointestinal tract. The intestines from donors TSP2 and TSP14 were sectioned into five regions: the duodenum, jejunum, ileum, and ascending and sigmoid colon (Fig. 6A). 


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q111985889)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q111985889)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q111985889&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
