
A machine learning method for the discovery of minimum marker gene combinations for cell type identification from single-cell RNA sequencing
============================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q111149940]  
  
Publication date : 04 of June, 2021  

# Highlights

Here, we describe a machine learning-based marker gene selection algorithm, NS-Forest version 2.0, which leverages the nonlinear attributes of random forest feature selection and a binary expression scoring approach to discover the minimal marker gene expression combinations that optimally capture the cell type identity represented in complete scRNA-seq transcriptional profiles. The marker genes selected provide an expression barcode that serves as both a useful tool for downstream biological investigation and the necessary and sufficient characteristics for semantic cell type definition.

Despite the incredible promise of single-cell transcriptomic analysis, representations of these cell type clusters and their transcriptional phenotypes have not been adequately formalized in a standardized way to ensure effective dissemination in accordance with FAIR principles (Wilkinson et al. 2016).

These instances of “cell type clusters” defined by NS-Forest markers can form the basis for the instantiation of an ontology class for adoption into the official Cell Ontology. Progress is already underway in developing programmatic and scalable methods to handle the volumes of single-cell data being generated. This ontological representation can address several pressing needs of the wider biological research community, producing an easy, visually accessible overview of the results of many single-cell experiments in a traversable structure while preserving the hierarchical relationships inherent in a taxonomy of cell types. In addition, this ontology will provide a platform for integration with other data modalities, such as cell morphology, electrophysiology, and cell–cell interactions. A Provisional Cell Ontology (pCL) generated in this manner for human middle temporal gyrus and human, mouse, and marmoset primary motor cortex is available for exploration at https://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/PCL.


Here, we describe Necessary and Sufficient Forest (NS-Forest) version 2.0, which improves on the simple approach to feature selection implemented in the initial version of NS-Forest (Aevermann et al. 2018). 

To evaluate the differences in results between NS-Forest v1.3 and v2.0, we analyzed marker genes selected for cell type clusters generated from single-nuclei transcriptomes prepared from all cortical layers (1–6) of the human middle temporal gyrus (MTG) obtained from postmortem and surgically resected samples

<!-- reanalysis of previously published data -->

Here, we describe the development and performance of NS-Forest version 2.0, a method for the identification of cell type–specific gene expression markers from scRNA-seq data.

Beyond their use for defining and investigating cell types, necessary and sufficient marker genes also offer a dimensionality reduction with limited loss of fidelity to the originally clustering solution. This dimensionality reduction offers a feasible way of representing the clustering solution with a minimal amount of information, which is ideal for data dissemination. 



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q111149940)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q111149940)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q111149940&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/GR.275569.121)  
