
A Distant Supervision Corpus for Extracting Biomedical Relationships Between Chemicals, Diseases and Genes
==========================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q111651065]  
  
Publication date : 13 of April, 2022  

# Highlights

Our dataset contains 80k biomedical research abstracts labeled with mentions of chemicals,
diseases, and genes, portions of which human experts labeled with 18 types of biomedical relationships between these entities
(intended for evaluation), and the remainder of which (intended for training) has been distantly labeled via the CTD database
with approximately 78% accuracy.

While the information in these databases is high in precision, with the growing publication rate their recall
is low (Baumgartner et al., 2007). 


The bioinformatics community recognized that machine learning Relation Extraction (RE) models could
help the manual curation task, and the BioCreative
workshops introduced the first shared task and manually labeled ‘gold standard’ dataset for training and
evaluating models for extracting protein-protein interactions from full text articles in 2006 (Krallinger et al.,
2006).

A large corpus of ∼ 80k abstracts with distant labeling of 14 relation types.

A smaller corpus of 523 abstracts, manually annotated with relationships by domain experts.

we will use relation to refer to the predicate schema r(Ts, To), where r is the relation type, and Ts, To are the argument entity type

ChemDisGene includes 10 of these classes7
, which
combined with the degrees defines 18 relation types:
• Chemical-Disease:
– marker/mechanism: A chemical that correlates
with a disease.
– therapeutic: A chemical that has a known or potential therapeutic role in a disease.
• Chemical-Gene: Each qualified by a degree.
– activity: An elemental function of a molecule.
Degrees: increases, decreases, or affects when
the direction is not indicated.
– binding: A molecular interaction (affects).
– expression: Expression of a gene product (increases, decreases, affects).
– localization: Part of the cell where a molecule resides (affects).
– metabolic processing: The biochemical alteration of a molecule’s structure, not including
changes in expression, stability, folding, localization, splicing, or transport (increases, decreases,
affects).
– transport: The movement of a molecule into or out of a cell (increases, decreases, affects).
• Gene-Disease:
– marker/mechanism: A gene that may be a
biomarker of a disease or play a role in the etiology of a disease.
– therapeutic: A gene that is or may be a therapeutic target in the treatment of a disease.

<!-- Very unclear what it means -->

A: Don’t record investigated or motivating relationships that remain unknown and hypothetical.
“Gene A is a therapeutic target for treatment of
Disease X; it may therefore have a potential role
in treatment of Disease Z.”
Record a relationship between Gene A and Disease X; but not between Gene A and Disease Z.


B: Inferring a relationship across sentences.
“We have previously identified a panel of fusion
genes in aggressive prostate cancers. In this study,
we showed that . . .CCNH-C5orf30 and TRMT11-
GRIK2 gene fusions were found in breast cancer,
colon cancer, . . . ”
Record a ‘Gene-Disease: marker/mechanism’ relationship between C5orf30 and prostate cancers.


Figure 2: Two examples from the curation guidelines.
Colors identify disease and gene mentions

DrugProt (Miranda et al., 2021), (Martin Krallinger and Valencia, 2021), is the most recent manually annotated corpus of biomedical research abstracts covering multiple (13) relation types between Chemicals
and Genes/Gene-products. ChemDisGene uses a different set of 14 relation types between Chemicals and
Genes, derived from CTD. These relations generally describe the observed effect of an interaction.

We introduced ChemDisGene, a new dataset of research abstracts labeled with biomedical entity mentions and distance-labeled with biomedical relationships, for training and evaluating multi-type multi-label biomedical RE models.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q111651065)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q111651065)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q111651065&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2204.06584)  
 * [Full text URL](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2204.06584.pdf)  
 * [arXiv ID](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2204.06584.pdf)  
