
Expanding dendritic cell nomenclature in the single-cell era
============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q111729803]  
  
Publication date : 13 of January, 2022  

# Highlights

Here, we discuss the importance of differentiating cell subsets from cell states when annotating DC clusters and propose a revised nomenclature of the DC lineage that integrates experimentally validated knowledge and unbiased transcriptomic profiling results.

The current consensus describes two main subsets of conventional DCs (cDCs), known as type 1 cDC (cDC1) and type 2 cDC (cDC2), that arise from a common DC progenitor (CDP) derived from myeloid progenitors, independently of monocytes

The differentiation of mouse cDC1s depends on two transcription factors, IRF8 and BATF3, and these cells correspond to CD141+CLEC9A+XCR1+ cDC1s in humans.

These studies have revealed, in addition to cDC1 and cDC2 clusters, the presence of other DC clusters based on transcriptional programmes shared across studies that are different to those of cDCs. These clusters have been given new names based on numerical annotation2, expression of gene transcripts3,4 or functional programmes5. However, we believe that these annotations have caused confusion in the field; different annotations have been given to DCs having many similarities, and similar annotations have been used to refer to distinct DC subsets

A cell subset is a discrete cellular compartment that arises from a distinct progenitor along a unique differentiation programme to carry out a distinct function. Cell states refer to the different molecular programmes that a cell subset can acquire in its lifespan in response to specific tissue cues. 

<!-- good definition, althoug a bit soup-ish -->

For now, we propose to define DC3s as a DC subset that expands in the inflamed state independently of the CDP-restricted cDC1/cDC2 lineage.

The lack of canonical cDC1 and cDC2 gene transcripts is in fact linked to the downregulation of cDC1 and cDC2 genes that occurs during the maturation of DCs, as previously described.

. Beyond the scope of this Comment piece, we hope that the DC community will come together as soon as possible to discuss a common nomenclature that integrates these new subsets and cell states.



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q111729803)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q111729803)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q111729803&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41577-022-00675-7)  
