
Mapping human haematopoietic stem cells from haemogenic endothelium to birth
============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q111686643]  
  
Publication date : 13 of April, 2022  

# Highlights

Developmental haematopoiesis consists of multiple waves of blood cell production that culminate in the generation of self-renewing HSCs. The steps to generate human HSCs rather than HSC-independent progenitors are poorly defined, compromising the efforts to differentiate HSCs from human pluripotent stem (PS) cells for transplantation and disease modelling. Human HSCs emerge in the aorta–gonad–mesonephros (AGM) 

Although IAHCs contain numerous haemogenic cells, transplantable HSCs are rare (one per AGM)3, suggesting functional immaturity

By creating a single-cell transcriptome map of human HSC ontogeny, we documented HSC development from arterial haemogenic endothelium (HE) to transplantable HSCs using cell-type-specific molecular signature

SPINK2 (ref. 40), which encodes a serine protease inhibitor observed recently in HSPC datasets16,38, was the most significantly enriched gene in HSC cluster. AGM HSCs also possessed a distinct endothelial signature (PROCR, EMCN).

The nascent HSC scorecard confirmed the resemblance of extraembryonic HLF+ cells to AGM HSCs (Extended Data Fig. 2c).

The liver SPINK2+ cells possessed a unique immune-system-related expression signature that was distinct from AGM SPINK2+ HSCs, but shared with SPINK2+ cells in the head and the heart (Extended Data Fig. 2i, j and Supplementary Table 3)

direct developmental trajectory was observed from GJA5+ arterial endothelial cells (ECs) to HSCs, but not other haematopoietic cells.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q111686643)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q111686643)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q111686643&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-022-04571-X)  
