
WikiProject Clinical Trials for Wikidata
========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q111507314]  
  
Publication date : 04 of April, 2022  

# Highlights

 The motivation for the project was gaining the benefits of hosting in Wikidata, which include distribution to new audiences and staging the content for the Wikimedia editor community to develop it further. 
 
 Project pages present options for engaging with the content in the Wikidata environment. 

Snapshots of the website and model data outcomes are available in a February 2022 archival record.[3] Figure 1 shows the project
landing page where links to available resources include information about the data model, query collection, instructions to curate, details about the project, and forum to discuss the project.

The name “WikiProject Clinical Trials” refers to the Wikipedia cultural practice of welcoming editors into community collaborations called “WikiProjects”.

The Wikidata community discusses use cases in WikiProject community forums, which are themselves staging grounds for yet more
review and the solicitation of off-wiki outreach.
Contributions from off-wiki include expert review and further data
contributions.

WikiProject Clinical Trials data model (partial).
he property label is the English term for the concept and the identifier is the corresponding Wikidata property code. These identities link to Wikidata property pages with more structured data definition and discussion.

Figure 2. Wikidata development diagram for WikiProject. 
WikiProject Clinical Trials landing pused the con tent curation method visualized here to plan project
development.
The circles represent actions which we took, and the squares represent points in the process
which published records. We describe this process in the methods section.

Medical information in Wikipedia is popular, and researchers have examined its quality.[13]. On
that basis, since the launch of Wikidata, [14] similar research has been undertaken on its quality, [15] including
its medical content [16, 17, 18, 19], multilingual aspects [20, 21] and the potential for integration with research
workflows.[22, 23, 24, 25, 1]


Additional properties, example applications, and links to property documentation for the WikiProject Clinical Trials
data model are on the “Model” subpage.[42]

Once the Clinical Trials Wikidata data model was created, data acquisition and import may proceed by mapping properties in the original dataset to those of corresponding Wikidata property. 
The original dataset is the clinical trial registry at ClinicalTrials.gov. Instead of taking data from the registry directly, we imported the Aggregate Analysis of ClinicalTrials.gov (AACT) dataset from the Clinical Trials Transformation Initiative because it restructures the original content for increased usability as a dataset.

Figure 5 presents “Clinical trials at Vanderbilt University”. The results of this simple query
provide a profile of clinical research at an institution, and the social context of the profile 
is the idea that lists of clinical trials for any institution could be more accessible, e.g. for 
discussion, for further remixing or other forms of engagement.

Data integration and enrichment in Wikidata The February 2022 snapshot of WikiProject Clinical Trials
contains queries and results which measure the extent of content integration with Wikidata.[3] 
The “Count of clinical trials” query in our snapshot found 356,915 Wikidata records.
 The “Most common properties applied to clinical trials” query reports that 356,551 of those records are
matched to a ClinicalTrials.gov ID, and number of records with “count of participants” and “study type”
are similarly near complete, because these were easy to import without
entity disambiguation or other curation. 3

Autocompletion in the Wikidata Query Service in Hindi while building a query that uses the property P2175 (medical condition treated). When the user interface language is set to Hindi, the user can type the elements of their query in Hindi and get autosuggestions that make use of the Wikidata labels and descriptions of the kind that were translated through this project.
Labels for property P2175 are available in about 40 languages.



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q111507314)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q111507314)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q111507314&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.04.01.22273328)  
