
Working for the Invisible Machines or Pumping Information into an Empty Void? An Exploration of Wikidata Contributors' Motivations
==================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q111640399]  
  
Publication date : 30 of March, 2022  

# Highlights

Structured data peer production (SDPP) platforms like Wikidata play an important role in knowledge production. Compared to traditional peer production platforms like Wikipedia, Wikidata data is more structured
and intended to be used by machines, not (directly) by people; end-user interactions with Wikidata often
happen through intermediary "invisible machines."


we find that: (i) Wikidata editors take on two
archetypes—Architects who define the ontological infrastructure of Wikidata, and Masons who build the
database through data entry and editing; (ii) the structured nature of Wikidata reveals novel editor motivations,
such as an innate drive for organizational work; (iii) most Wikidata editors have little understanding of how
their contributions are used

A foundational question in the study of peer production systems in general is what motivates
contributors to volunteer their time and effort? Prior work has demonstrated both intrinsic [28, 47] and
extrinsic [30] motivations for contributing. However, the nature of working on SDPP platforms and
the outcomes of that work differ from conventional peer production systems


On the other hand, working on Wikidata involves tasks like creating items, setting statements,
terms, and sitelinks, and protecting or reverting items or properties [25]. This work is constrained
by the rules of the database that generate semantic meaning across all items, and the outcomes
of this work are used primarily by machines.


RQ1: What personal characteristics lead Wikidata editors to take on certain types of tasks over
others?
RQ2: What editor motivations are fulfilled by the structured nature of Wikidata?
RQ3: How are editors motivated (or demotivated) by the perceived usage of their contributions?
We carried out an interview study to explore these questions and performed an inductive thematic
analysis [8] of interview transcripts. 

Wikidata’s licensing is
also highly non-restrictive; it freely allows commercial use of its data, so it is used by some for-profit
businesses to power online tools. For example, Google use Wikidata as a source for improving their
Knowledge Graph.


Through an interview study with 17 OSS contributors, Trinkenreich et al. [37] identified the
existence of both community-centric roles and project-centric roles

. Welser et al. [40] examined qualitative data of user comments
and identified four social roles within Wikipedia: substantive experts, technical editors, vandal
fighters, and social networkers

For Wikidata specifically, Piscopo and Simperl [31] and Müller-Birn et al. [25] defined user roles
based on quantitative analyses of editing activity. Müller-Birn et al. [25] used k-means to cluster
the participation patterns of both human and bot Wikidata editors based on their revision histories.
They found that the majority of Wikidata contributors take on one of the following specialized
roles: reference editor, item creator, item editor, item expert, property editor, and property engineer

In the context of Wikipedia, through an online survey, Yang and Lai [45] identified that Wikipedia
contributors are motivated by having their internal standards met through positive feedback. Using
the taxonomy of volunteering activity (6 motivational categories), Nov [28] described a survey
aimed at categorizing the motivations of Wikipedians, the results of which showed that Wikipedia
editors are driven primarily by fun and ideology.

We posted our research interview invitation on the Wikidata project chat page. We simultaneously
went through Wikidata edit statistics on Wikiscan, and identified users who were actively editing
at that time and sent out individual invites through their personal talk pages

We find that occupants of the first 5 roles in Müller-Birn et al. [25] are
well described by the Mason archetype, as they primarily focus on creating and editing references
and items, and editing properties. We find that Architects, who enjoy collaborative and mentally
engaging work that cannot be performed by bots, take on many of the same tasks described by the
property engineer role in Müller-Birn et al. [25].

Architects focus on developing the ontological infrastructure or “blueprints” of Wikidata. They
primarily engage in modeling and proposing properties, so they help decide how information on
Wikidata gets represented—e,g., what pieces of information are documented for a certain type of
item. Masons, on the other hand, use Architects’ blueprints to “lay the bricks,” so to speak.

P3, for example, is a recent retiree who used to “get a real kick out
of explaining things” in her career, and now uses Wikidata as a way to “keep [her] brain engaged.”

Similarly, P10 is “happy to just tinker in my
own little corner” rather than get involved in the Wikidata community

P12, for example, primarily works on the area in which he has an advanced degree because
he is “not sure I have the expertise to say this is how we model the information” in other areas

any of our participants had also contributed to other peer production platforms, so there was
significant overlap between their motivations and those described in previous literature on peer
production platforms. These included: entertainment [15], “some people do Dungeons and Dragons,
but I like to do Wikidata” (P15); altruism [30], “it seems kind of selfish to have all those books [...] and
not share them with anybody” (P3); and the desire to spread knowledge in a particular domain [16],
“general knowledge about the things I’m interested in will continue to grow and spread, and I’m hoping
that’s one of the results of the work I do here” (P3). The desire to share domain-specific knowledge is
more characteristic of Architects, as they are often experts who are highly interested in a particular
area.

P7 believes Wikidata’s structure helps the community be “a lot more lax than Wikipedia” specifically because its structured nature means “there’s a lot less potential to do hard-to-revert damage” to
information on the platform. This makes Wikidata a particularly good fit for Masons like him, who
dislike friction with other members of the community.

e cases, understanding how their contributions are used could actually be a demotivating
factor. As P5 states, “it can make people hesitate to contribute, when they know that the license is
going to permit downstream for-profit reuse without giving them anything other than the credit.”
P13 expressed this exact sentiment in recalling his “struggle with the idea of creating value for a
multi-trillion-dollar company” through his previous contributions to Google Map Maker.

t. If he is just “pumping the information
into an empty void,” P10 would not contribute to Wikidata at all, as he “may as well just be filling
out an Excel spreadsheet” on his computer.

<!-- Pumping information into an empty void is a lot of how it feels to do science nowadays -->

We now discuss usage opacity on Wikidata—the phenomenon we observed whereby most of our
participants indicated having no knowledge of how or if their contributions were being used.

. P2 mentioned that Wikidata’s query
service is slow and unstable, incentivizing tool developers to query their own local downloads of
Wikidata’s data. P10 similarly highlighted the advantages of querying local copies of Wikidata
data to avoid latency causing queries to be dispersed across a bunch of distinct entities—“invisible
machines”—each of which holds its own copies of data that originated from Wikidata. Because it is
an SDPP platform that provides structured data for use in other software, it is unsurprising that
Wikidata’s data is used in this way

Two of our participants mentioned the aversion many Wikidata editors feel towards the idea of volunteering their time in a way that creates profit
for large businesses, e.g., Google. Revealing the machines and increasing usage transparency can
therefore function as a demotivating factor for some editors, if the machines are run by for-profit
corporations. One simple solution to this would be for Wikidata to only highlight reuse of Wikidata
by non-profit third parties. For obvious ethical reasons, we do not recommend this approach. We
instead recommend that future work explore potential solutions to this tension between community
values and the ways in which Wikidata is used.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q111640399)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q111640399)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q111640399&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1145/3512982)  
