
Designing Interfaces
====================
  
  [@wikidata:Q111365704]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2005  

# Highlights
Jenifer Tidwell is an interaction designer and software developer for The
MathWorks, makers of technical computing software


She has been known to design web sites, and was an early enthusiast for rich Internet application
(RIA) technology, having helped design and develop Curl in the early
2000s.

Things have changed. If you design interfaces today, you work with a much bigger palette of components
and ideas. You have a choice of many more user interface toolkits than before, such as Java™ Swing, Qt,
HTML and Javascript, Flash, and numerous open-source options.


Users’ expectations are higher than they used to be—if your inter-
face isn’t easy to use “out of the box,” users will not think well of it. Even if the interface obeys all the
standards, you may have misunderstood users’ preferred workflow, used the wrong vocabulary, or made it
too hard to figure out what the software even does.

Jef Raskin once pointed out that when we say “intuitive” in the context of software, we really mean “familiar.”

That’s where patterns come in. This book catalogs many of those familiar parts, in ways you
can reuse in many different contexts.

So there’s nothing really new in here. If you’ve done any web or UI design, or even thought
much about it, you should say, “Oh, right, I know what that is” to most of these patterns. But
a few of them might be new to you, and some of the familiar ones may not be part of your
usual design repertoire.

This book isn’t Design 101; it’s more like Design 225. As mentioned earlier, it’s expected that
you already know the basics of UI design, such as available toolkits and control sets, con-
cepts like drag-and-drop and focus, and the importance of usability testing and user feed-
back


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q111365704)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q111365704)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q111365704&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
