
Somatic mosaicism reveals clonal distributions of neocortical development
=========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q111749842]  
  
Publication date : 20 of April, 2022  

# Highlights

We combined the sampling of 25 distinct anatomic locations with deep whole-genome sequencing in a neurotypical deceased individual and confirmed results with 5 samples collected from each of three additional donors. We identified 259 bona fide mosaic variants from the index case, then deconvolved distinct geographical, cell-type and clade organizations across the brain and other organs.

Derived from a single fertilized zygote, the human brain contains approximately 170 billion neurons and glial cells, part of the 30 trillion cells that make up the body

Ventral progenitors contribute inhibitory neurons and oligodendrocytes16,19,20, whereas microglia derive from mesoderm and, therefore, diverge earlier in development from the other brain cell types21.

 We hypothesized that deep-sequencing analysis of multiple independent cortical regions would uncover many more clonal variants. We enrolled a deceased 70-year-old neurotypical individual (ID01), then biopsied using an 8 mm punch across each of ten neocortical lobes (five from each hemisphere), as well as cerebellum, heart, liver and both kidneys (Fig. 1a).

 Fig. 2: Overlapping geoclone AFs reveal evidence of cellular bottlenecks within the neocortical anlage.

 Fluorescence-activated nuclei sorting (FANS) enabled us to separate cell types on the basis of NeuN (neurons), OLIG2 (oligodendrocytes), LHX2+NeuN− (astrocytes) and PU.1 (microglia) nuclear antigens

 We represent the data in ‘lolliplots’, comparing cell type, lobe and measured AF (Fig. 3b).
a, FANS isolation of nuclei from homogenates (Lrg) for neurons (NeuN+), oligodendrocytes (OLIG2+), astrocytes (LHX2+NeuN−; hereafter, LHX2+) or microglia (PU.1+). b, Hypothetical example variant visualized as a lolliplot: AFs across anatomical regions (PF, F, P, O, T) and cell types (bottom) in the left versus right of the sampled tissues

We identified a separation event that ‘traps’ or enriches founder clones within brain hemispheres, and from which the remaining neural hemispheric cells probably derive, occurring when the neural progenitor pool is 90–200 cells.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q111749842)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q111749842)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q111749842&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-022-04602-7)  
