
The neutrotime transcriptional signature defines a single continuum of neutrophils across biological compartments
=================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112295467]  
  
Publication date : 17 of May, 2021  

# Highlights

Here, we apply single-cell RNA sequencing to neutrophils from normal and inflamed mouse tissues. Whereas conventional clustering yields multiple alternative organizational structures, diffusion mapping plus RNA velocity discloses a single developmental spectrum, ordered chronologically.

Together, these data identify a single developmental spectrum as the dominant organizational theme of neutrophil heterogeneity.

It is therefore unknown whether neutrophils are best conceptualized as a mélange of subsets or as a phenotypic continuum.

 Using RNA velocity, Monocle analysis and transcription factor mapping, we show that this main sequence has no major branches. 

Neutrotime is defined by a structured gene expression program
We sought to understand the transcriptional changes associated with progression along neutrotime. We identified the genes that showed the strongest positive and negative correlations with neutrotime, independent of source tissue. 

Neutrophils are exquisitely responsive to type I interferon, as reflected in the prominent transcriptomic impact of in vivo administration of this cytokine35 (Fig. 4a). Neutrophils exhibiting transcriptional evidence of interferon response have been identified in models of cancer and inflammation, although not previously in healthy mice

We next constructed a cell trajectory within a UMAP embedding created through the Monocle pipeline and ran Moran’s I, a measure of spatial autocorrelation, to identify variable factors within a two-dimensional space
 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112295467)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112295467)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112295467&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41467-021-22973-9)  
