
A deep convolutional neural network for segmentation of whole-slide pathology images identifies novel tumour cell-perivascular niche interactions that are associated with poor survival in glioblastoma
========================================================================================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112291651]  
  
Publication date : 29 of April, 2021  

# Highlights
 In order to map the gene signatures identified by semantic segmentation to this data, we first re-analysed our scRNA-seq data using CellKb (Supplementary Table 9). Using this approach, we were able to assign a cell ontology type to each of the different cell clusters in the data derived from each individual patient (Fig. 4b, Supplementary Table 10)

 Further in silico cell ontology analysis along with single-cell RNA sequencing data from resected glioblastoma tissue samples showed that these tumour regions had different gene signatures, whose expression was driven by different cell types in the regional tumour microenvironment. 

Here, we implemented a deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) model for semantic segmentation of histopathological (Haematoxylin-Eosin, H&E) images trained on the Ivy GAP dataset


We use average expression per cluster of differential expressed genes in this data for analysis of cell ontology and hierarchical clustering analysis.

The Ivy GAP portal (http://glioblastoma.alleninstitute.org/) is a freely accessible online database that contains GBM slides and their corresponding ground truths annotated using a statistical machine learning method. Although this dataset is very helpful for further research, we identified variable segmentation accuracy in some masks by manual inspection.

r the ITneg signature, we identified several GO processes, including cell proliferation in midbrain and regeneration, possibly reflecting the stem-cell-like properties of tumour cells in those regions.16,19,51 Processes involving ‘glial cell migration’, ‘locomotion’, ‘cell contractility’, ‘cell movement’ and ‘lymphocyte migration’ were also identified to be associated with the gene signatures specific to this region. This highlights the migratory and invasive potential of cancer cells52 as well as the motility of microglia and lymphocytes, suggesting that in the IT region these different cell types within the microenvironment may be cooperating to enhance the invasive capacity of glioblastoma cells.

Accordingly, we investigated the cell types that are more likely to express these gene signatures in each tumour region using CellKb application software, which uses publicly available scRNA-seq data to predict the cells types that are likely to express a list of differentially expressed genes (“match score”34). 

This match score is calculated for each cell type and correspond to the sum of rank-based scores calculated for overlapping genes between the query and the cell type. 
The match score thus accounts for the gene rank, the difference in gene ranks and the total number of significant genes in the cell type. 
Using CellKb, we obtained a list of cell types and for each cell type an associated match score and a list of genes specific for that cell type (Supplementary Table 7).

The results revealed that IT markers that are negatively correlated with survival (ITneg) are predicted to be highly expressed by microglial cells (CL:0000129) and monocytes (CL:0000576).

Using this approach, we were able to assign a cell ontology type to each of the different cell clusters in the data derived from each individual patient (Fig. 4b, Supplementary Table 10), which correlated well with our previous manual cell assignment.

Overall, these results reinforce the notion that different brain tumour exhibit different microenvironment properties and cellular compositions that may contribute to prognosis in glioblastoma.


a. b Summary of potential ligand–receptor interactions identified in our dataset. Please note that GNAS (a Gα subunit) and PTGIR (a G protein-coupled receptor) interacts on the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane. Supplementary Table 14 provides a full list of ligand–receptor pairs identified in this work.

In summary, our analysis of the TCGA GBM database using segmentation of histopathological images provides new opportunities for the characterisation of the tumour microenvironment in glioblastoma within distinctly spatial regions within these very heterogeneous brain tumours. These results have led to the identification of novel prognosis-associated region-specific gene signatures and targets for treating glioblastoma and are now available to the rest of the brain cancer research community.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112291651)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112291651)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112291651&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41416-021-01394-X)  
