
Automated Network Assembly of Mechanistic Literature for Informed Evidence Identification to Support Cancer Risk Assessment
===========================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112281359]  
  
Publication date : 03 of March, 2022  

# Highlights

We investigated whether evidence identification for hazard assessment can become more efficient and informed through an automated approach that combines machine reading of publications with network visualization tools.

Using established literature search terms for KCCs, we retrieved and analyzed literature using Integrated Network and Dynamical Reasoning Assembler (INDRA). INDRA combines large-scale literature processing with pathway databases and extracts relationships between biomolecules, bioprocesses, and chemicals into statements (e.g., “benzene activates DNA damage”).

Our method is an automated approach to condense mechanistic literature into searchable and interpretable networks based on an a priori ontology. 

ther researchers have applied a bioinformatics approach to structure and analyze mechanistic data. Carvaillo et al. (2019), for example, combined text mining and systems biology by creating a tool, the adverse outcome pathway (AOP)-helpFinder, that enriches AOPs. 

 The evidence here and below is referred to as technical evidence emerging from text mining, which is not automatically and directly equal to biological/toxicological evidence in the context of hazard assessment.

 From the INDRA Statements, 91 networks [i.e., seven networks (KCC 1, 2/3, 4, 5, 6/7, 8, and 9/10) for 13 compounds] were created (Table 3). Table 3 provides a comparison between the KCC network size (i.e., the number of nodes and edges) and network support (i.e., sBS of the edges), and the actual evaluation for KCC activation by the IARC (see “IARC evaluations for evidence of KC activation” in the Supplemental Material).

 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112281359)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112281359)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112281359&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP9112)  
