
COVID-19 pandemic drives changes in participation in citizen science project "City Nature Challenge" in Tokyo
=============================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112272423]  
  
Publication date : 27 of February, 2021  

# Highlights

This paper aims to describe changes in participant engagement in the City Nature Challenge (CNC) in Tokyo. The CNC is a four-day international event held in April to document biodiversity in cities using an online citizen science platform, iNaturalist.

Online citizen science could provide opportunities for many citizens to get outside and participate in conservation science during and after the pandemic.


Bioblitzes are a specific and widely used type of citizen science event—field events in which scientists, naturalists, and non-expert participants work together to identify and record many species within a designated time and region (Robinson et al., 2013; Roger and Klistorner, 2016).

Platforms for online citizen science such as iNaturalist, eBird, and iSpot, which are already used by many people, can be especially useful during COVID-19 (Crimmins et al., this issue).
The CNC is a four-day citizen science event in which participants use the online platform, iNaturalist, to document biodiversity in cities around the world (Leong and Trautwein, 2019; https://citynaturechallenge.org/). This paper gives information on how the citizen science data obtained during the pandemic can be utilized for conservation related activities, and insight into how to continue citizen science during or after the pandemic.

The number of participants and observations declined by more than 60% between 2019 and 2020 (Table 1). 

During the COVID-19 pandemic, citizen science organizers had to redesign some programs, particularly those that involve in-person interactions. Citizen science during the pandemic can provide a productive recreational activity (Rose et al., 2020) at a time when many people cannot pursue their usual hobbies and when some people have extra time because of teleworking, suspension of work, school closures, and restrictions on going out. The CNC is a project that people can do without crowding, and if they are interested in nature, it can meet the needs of these potential participants. They can participate for short periods of time, as in the temporary observers in our analysis, or can participate more deeply like the enthusiastic observers.

Citizen science projects like the CNC can help to avoid disruption of scientific monitoring during the pandemic (Corlett et al., 2020) and evaluate the short-term impact of COVID-19 on the local environment (Bates et al., 2020).



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112272423)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112272423)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112272423&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BIOCON.2021.109001)  
