
Using Convolutional Neural Networks to Efficiently Extract Immense Phenological Data From Community Science Images
==================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112686746]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2021  

# Highlights

The iNaturalist platform offers a particularly rich archive, containing more than 49 million verifiable, georeferenced, open access images, encompassing seven continents and over 278,000 species. 

Here, we train a convolutional neural network (CNN) to annotate images of Alliaria petiolata into distinct phenophases from iNaturalist and compare the performance of the model with non-expert human annotators. We demonstrate that researchers can successfully employ deep learning techniques to extract phenological information from community science images


 The effort and costs associated with sorting and categorizing images into phenological stages means these community science biodiversity databases are underutilized in phenological research

We focus on Alliaria petiolata (Brassicaceae; garlic mustard), a biennial herb that is common in Europe, western Asia, and widely naturalized in forests of eastern North America. In its first year, A. petiolata is a low-growing rosette of leaves and reproduces in mid-spring of its second year (Anderson et al., 1996). We selected A. petiolata because it is the fourth-most observed plant species on iNaturalist (over 40,000 research-grade observations between 1995 and 2020) and has distinct reproductive structures that can be identified from images. 

 We find that CNNs are efficient and effective at classifying images into both a coarse two-phase classification scheme and a finer four-phase classification scheme. 

 . By using open-source machine learning functions from the PyTorch libraries in Python (Paszke et al., 2019), we also reduced our coding time

 We were unable to manually classify the four-stage phenology of 4.0% of A. petiolata images because they did not contain the key features required to classify phenology. While expert human annotators can manually remove unclassifiable images from analysis, our trained CNN was forced to label them into a pre-defined category. This ultimately increases the number of incorrect classifications
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112686746)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112686746)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112686746&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/FPLS.2021.787407)  
