
Constructing local cell-specific networks from single-cell data
==========
  [@wikidata:Q112144126]  
  

# Highlights
gle-cell RNA sequencing provides a unique opportunity to gain understanding at the cellular level, but the technical features of the data create severe challenges when constructing gene networks. We develop a method that successfully skirts these challenges to estimate a cell-specific network for each single cell and cell type.

We develop an approach, locCSN, that estimates cell-specific networks (CSNs) for each cell, preserving information about cellular heterogeneity that is lost with other approaches.

This idea was first proposed by Dai et al. (13) and Li et al. (14) wherein they determine gene–gene connectivity at a single-cell level. 

The algorithm for construction of CSN as originally published (13) (oCSN) is to estimate, for each cell, a connection strength between each pair of genes, resulting in a gene–gene network for every cell. 

e conclude that CSN works well on distinct cell types. The averaged CSN preserves gene blocks, distinguishes between cell types, and depicts a clearer coexpression pattern than Pearson’s correlation. By contrast, the averaged CSNs calculated from oCSN ignore coexpression between genes, especially the dense block for NPC at the upper right corner (SI Appendix, Fig. S9). Finally, we show that our results are robust to a range of tuning parameters (SI Appendix, Fig. S9 B and C).

To understand the function of gene communities, we check Gene Ontology (GO) terms (25) (SI Appendix, section 4) for the seven gene communities (SI Appendix, Fig. S13 and Dataset S1).


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112144126)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112144126)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112144126&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
