
The Human Proteoform Atlas: a FAIR community resource for experimentally derived proteoforms
============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112682823]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2022  

# Highlights

The Human Proteoform Atlas (HPfA) is a web-based repository of experimentally verified human proteoforms on-line at http://human-proteoform-atlas.org and is a direct descendant of the Consortium of Top-Down Proteomics’ (CTDP) Proteoform Atlas. 

The term proteoforms has been introduced to refer to the specific molecular species of an expressed and translated gene including the precise combination of sequence variants, alternative splicing events, and post-translational modifications (PTMs) (Figure 1) (1). Proteoforms represent the main determinants of cellular phenotypes in protein-level biology yet remain largely understudied.

The number of proteoforms is larger and difficult to estimate because of phenomena such as mRNA splicing, PTMs, coding single-nucleotide polymorphism (cSNPs), and similar event

KRAS is alternatively spliced at the fourth exon, yielding the KRAS4A and KRAS4B isoforms (4). These genes encode for small GTPases which play important roles in cell growth and proliferation via the MAPK and PI3K pathways.

The Protein Ontology (PRO) (6), another major protein knowledgebase, provides proteoform-level permanent identifiers, but only after a proteoform is published in the peer-reviewed literature and has been manually curated

Currently, there are 68 ontologic terms used from seven ontologies (Figure 2A), including 11 different tissue types (Figure 2B), and 12 separate ontology terms associated with disease (Figure 2C).

A user visiting the site first encounters a view of the eight sub-atlases, with dataset and proteoform counts. If the user is interested in the proteoforms associated with a particular cell type, for example, an eosinophil cell, they may select the Cell atlas which displays a breakdown of all ontological terms from the Cell ontology (CL) in the atlas. Selecting the eosinophil cell ontology term (CL:0000771), proceeds to an overview, including a description of the ontology term, links to EBI (39) and PURL (40), as well as a list of proteoforms associated with eosinophil cells, including protein associations, and modifications



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112682823)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112682823)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112682823&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/NAR/GKAB1086)  
