
The LOTUS initiative for open knowledge management in natural products research
===============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112143478]  
  
Publication date : 26 of May, 2022  

# Highlights

 Currently, reliance on a disparate set of non-standardized, insular, and specialized databases presents a series of challenges for data access, both within the discipline and for integration and interoperability between related fields. The fundamental elements of exchange are referenced structure-organism pairs that establish relationships between distinct molecular structures and the living organisms from which they were identified. Consolidating and sharing such information via an open platform has strong transformative potential for natural products research and beyond. This is the ultimate goal of the newly established LOTUS initiative, which has now completed the first steps toward the harmonization, curation, validation and open dissemination of 750,000+ referenced structure-organism pairs. LOTUS data is hosted on Wikidata and regularly mirrored on https://lotus.naturalproducts.net. 


We thus adopt here a broad definition of a NP as any chemical entity found in a living organism, hereafter refered to as a structure-organism pair. 

A tertiary inter-operative NP platform is thus dependent on a secondary set of data that has been selectively annotated into a DB from primary literature sources. The experimental data itself reflects a complex process involving collection or sourcing of natural material (and establishment of its identity), a series of material transformation and separation steps and ultimately the chemical or spectral elucidation of isolates. 


 NAPRALERT contains over 900,000 such records, due to equivalent structure-organism pairs reported in different citations. However, NAPRALERT is not an open platform and employs an access model that provides only limited free searches of the dataset. Finally, the NPAtlas (van Santen et al., 2019; van Santen et al., 2022) is a more recent project complying with the FAIR (Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability, and Reuse) guidelines for digital assets (Wilkinson et al., 2016) and offering convenient web access. While the NPAtlas allows retrieval and encourages submission of compounds with their biological source, it focuses on microbial NP and ignores a wide range of biosynthetically active organisms found in the Plantae kingdom.



The LOTUS initiative seeks to address the aforementioned shortcomings. Building on the experience gained through the establishment of the recently published COlleCtion of Open NatUral producTs (COCONUT) (Sorokina et al., 2021a) regarding the aggregation and curation of NP structural databases, this savoir-faire was expanded to accommodate biological organisms and scientific references in the equation. After extensive data curation and harmonization of over 40 electronic ressources, pairs characterizing a NP occurrence were standardized at the chemical, biological and reference levels. 

The alluvial plot in Figure 2 illustrates the individual contribution of each source and original subcategory that led to the processed categories: structure, organism, and reference.

Despite (or possibly due to) their power, SPARQL queries can be complex and potentially require an in-depth understanding of the models and data structure. This involves a steep learning curve which can discourage some end-users. 

The easiest way to search for NP occurrence information in Wikidata is by typing the name of a chemical structure directly into the ‘Search Wikidata’ field, which (for left-to-right languages) can be found in the upper right corner of the Wikidata homepage or any other Wikidata page. For example, by typing ‘erysodine’, the user will land on the page of this compound (Q27265641). Scrolling down to the ‘found in taxon’ statement will allow the user to view the biological organisms reported to contain this NP (Figure 3). Clicking the reference link under each taxon name links to the publication(s) documenting the occurrence.


Table 2
Potential questions about structure-organism relationships and corresponding Wikidata queries.

<!-- Interesting approaches to be used to display Wikidata information in the final PhD paper -->

 To ensure that data is kept up-to-date, SMILES codes are automatically downloaded from Wikidata daily. The endpoint allows users to run federated queries and, thereby, proceed to structure-oriented searches on the LOTUS data hosted at Wikidata. For example, the SPARQL query https://w.wiki/4VG9 returns a list of all organisms that produce NP with an indolic scaffold. The output is aggregated at the parent taxa level of the containing organisms and ranked by the number of scaffold occurrences.



Contribution of individual electronic NP resources to LOTUS
The added value of the LOTUS initiative to assemble multiple electronic NP resources is illustrated in Figure 5: Panel A shows the contributions of the individual electronic NP resources to the ensemble of chemical structures found in one of the most studied vascular plants, Arabidopsis thaliana (“Mouse-ear cress”; Q147096). Panel B shows the ensemble of taxa reported to contain the planar structure of the widely occurring triterpenoid β-sitosterol (Q121802).

The chemical diversity captured in LOTUS is here displayed using TMAP (Figure 6), a visualization library allowing the structural organization of large chemical datasets as a minimum spanning tree (Probst and Reymond, 2020). Using Faerun, an interactive HTML file is generated to display metadata and molecule structures by embedding the SmilesDrawer library (Probst and Reymond, 2018a; Probst and Reymond, 2018b)

On the biological organisms curation side, we are aware of shortcomings, whether inherent to specific inputs or regarding limitations of the general process. Regarding inputs, some cases are clearly not resolvable except through human curation. For example, the word Lotus can refer both to the genus of a plant of the Fabaceae family (https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q3645698) or to the vernacular name of Nelumbo nucifera (https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q16528). In fact, the name of the LOTUS Initiative comes, in part, from this taxonomic curiosity - and the challenge for its automated curation.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112143478)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112143478)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112143478&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.7554/ELIFE.70780)  
