
<i>Diatoms.org</i>: supporting taxonomists, connecting communities
==================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112808209]  
  
Publication date : 11 of January, 2022  

# Highlights

The website not only addresses the needs of experienced diatom scientists for consistent identification but is also designed to meet users at their level of expertise, including engaging the lay public in the importance of diatom science.

The website now contains over 1000 species pages contributed by over 100 content contributors, from students to established scientists. 

The project began with the intent to provide accurate information on diatom identification, ecology, and distribution using an approach that incorporates engaging design, user feedback, and advanced data access technology. 


Ultimately, if the field of diatom taxonomy, ecology, and biodiversity is to be relevant, a new generation of taxonomists needs to be trained and employed using new tools. 
We propose that diatoms.org is in a key position to serve as a hub of training and continuity for the study of diatom biodiversity and aquatic conditions.

However, knowledge of the basic biology and diversity of diatoms continues to be limited, even by specialists, and even within North America. Yet, knowledge of diatoms has great utility in environmental sciences (Smol & Stoermer 2010), as does an EOL-type resource that is specific for diatom specialists.

The Encyclopedia of Life (EOL), a model content curation community (Rotman et al. 2012), is at the forefront of collaboration and provides open access and engagement of the public in science (Wilson 2003).

Since Ehrenberg (1854) first recognized the distinct diatom flora of western North America, floristic zones of the eastern, southeastern and northwestern parts of the U.S. have been noted (Kociolek & Spaulding 2000, Potapova & Charles 2003, Morales 2005, Kociolek 2006, Ponader & Potapova 2007). Yet, while there are a number of recent regional floras, including the Arctic (Antoniades et al. 2009a), Cape Cod (Siver et al. 2005), Montana (Bahls 2005, 2010, 2013), Great Smoky Mountains (Furey et al. 2011), and the Atlantic Coastal Plain (Siver & Hamilton 2011), floras are limited in terms of geographic and taxonomic scope and become outdated because of the rapid pace of revisions in classification that follow advancements in understanding phylogenic relationships (Nakov et al. 2014, 2015, Ruck et al. 2016a, b).

The primary audience of diatoms.org includes those who need to identify diatoms or those who seek detailed scientific information about their ecological roles in aquatic systems. 

Biodiversity is crucial to society, and it is this audience that has the ability to effect species conservation and ecosystem management (Jetz et al. 2013, Meyer et al. 2015, Navarro et al. 2017).


Names
Taxa included within diatoms.org were initially drawn from lists developed through the U.S. Geological Survey National Water Quality Assessment program. In the process of developing species pages for the project, however, nomenclatural errors and inconsistent identifications emerged in the list. Furthermore, the project began with a bias towards taxa reported from streams and rivers. As contributors have worked on projects on lakes, wetlands, and estuaries, the habitat coverage has expanded. Now, contributors use, improve, and update the list of taxa simultaneously with new taxon pages and updates to taxon pages.


The project adheres to the International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) for algae, fungi, and plants (Turland et al. 2018) and does not bypass formal scientific publication in a peer-reviewed journal. Beginning in 2012, the ICN included electronic publication as constituting valid publication, under certain parameters:

29.1. Publication is effected, under this Code, by distribution of printed matter (through sale, exchange, or gift) to the general public or at least to scientific institutions with generally accessible libraries. Publication is also effected by distribution on or after 1 January 2012 of electronic material in Portable Document Format (PDF; see also Art. 29.3 and Rec. 29A.1) in an online publication with an International Standard Serial Number (ISSN) or an International Standard Book Number (ISBN).

While diatoms.org could serve as an outlet for formal taxonomic publication, it has not included new descriptions to date.



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112808209)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112808209)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112808209&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/0269249X.2021.2006790)  
