
Biological Individuals
======================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112899112]  
  

# Highlights

Extending the reach of common sense through magnification allows flagella-propelled protists, tRNA molecules, prions, and bacteria of many kinds to be seen or inferred. At larger or collective scales, there are herds of zebras, sweeping and astonishing coral reefs, algae blooms, biofilms made up of many different species, and even fungus complexes several hectares in area and with masses greater than that of an elephant.

The psychologist Hermann Ebbinghaus’s famous quip that “psychology has a long past, but only a short history”

Philosophers of biology typically understand biological individuals to be distinct from other kinds of entities in the biosciences, such as properties, processes, and events (though see Dupré 2012, Nicholson 2018, Nicholson & Dupré 2018). 
Biological individuals have three-dimensional spatial boundaries, endure for some period of time, are composed of physical matter, bear properties, and participate in processes and events. 

<!-- That is a good definition -->

Biological processes (such as photosynthesis) and biological events (such as speciation) lack such a suite of features. 

To provide a sense of the complexities that an answer to the Focal Question must address, consider two examples that take us from the ground level of common sense with which this review began to the intimate interplay between empirical data gathered by biologists and the conceptual clarification provided by philosophers that is a hallmark of thinking about biological individuals.

The polyps are indisputably biological individuals. But further, conservation biologists also often describe the coral reefs themselves, consisting of the polyps and the deposits considered together, as living things that can grow and die.

Neither are the zooxanthellae free of dependence. By infecting the polyps they gain a feeding den crucial to their survival.

Alternatively, perhaps the reef should be thought of as some other kind of biological individual, such as an ecosystem, that contains several distinct organisms, the polyps and the zooxanthellae, as proper parts.

This should occasion no surprise, since, as section 1 indicated, historically organisms have been regarded as prominent examples of biological individuals and organism and biological individual have often been used interchangeably. 

Microbialism: Understanding the living world requires focusing on collaborations between macrobes and a variety of microbes (e.g., viruses, prions, plasmids, symbionts), taking seriously the idea that the biological individuals identified at the ground level of common sense constitute a small part of that world (Dupré & O’Malley 2007, 2009).

Eliminativism: Far from being paradigmatic biological individuals, organisms may be marginal or unusual special cases of biological individuals and should be eliminated from our ontology (Haber 2013, Okasha 2011).

Promiscuous individualism is not simply the view that there are many legitimate ways to classify the world into biological individuals. It is also the corresponding ontological view that such legitimation is provided by there being multiple biological individuals there to classify. 

Challenging the view that there is just one biological individual (the lichen) or two (the fungus and the cyanobacterium), an advocate of promiscuous individualism can readily make the case that there are three biological individuals (the lichen, the fungus, and the cyanobacterium), pointing to the different purposes and goals one might have in opting for any of the numerical counts here.

<!-- That is pretty much my position -->

He also says that “[w]hether a group of microbes is a closely connected ecological community or an organism may be a matter of biological judgment” (2012: 153).

One way it can do so is by embracing the idea that it is not organisms but holobionts that are really paradigmatic biological individuals. 


# Comments

This discussion is of practical importance for knowledge management.

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112899112)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112899112)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112899112&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [Full text URL](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/biology-individual/)  
