
hECA: The cell-centric assembly of a cell atlas
===============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112636749]  
  
Publication date : 28 of April, 2022  

# Highlights

• A unified informatics framework for seamless cell-centric assembly of massive single-cell data
• Built the general-purpose human Ensemble Cell Atlas (hECA) V1.0 from scattered data


Assembling data of massive amounts of cells from multiple sources into an ensemble atlas have many technical and conceptual challenges (S. Chen et al., 2022b). 

But the microscopic location of each cell is not deterministic or destined. Multiple factors or properties may be used to index the cells at different granularities for different study purposes

We developed the human Ensemble Cell Atlas (hECA) as an instance of such a unified informatics framework. In hECA v1.0, we collected the single-cell transcriptomic data of 1,093,299 cells from 116 published datasets, covering 38 human organs and 146 cell types

hECA realized the cell-centric assembly of these data into a unified data repository with a special storage engine called uGT or unified giant table. 


Along with uGT is a unified hierarchical annotation framework (uHAF) we developed for hECA. Annotating with uHAF makes cell type labels from different datasets comparable and consistent. We also developed an API named ECAUGT (pronounced “e-caught”) to retrieve cells in the atlas efficiently.

 All cells were annotated with a unified framework of 146 cell type labels. The design of the system allows for the inclusion of magnitudes larger number of cells and cell types in future versions. Table 1 summarizes the current numbers of collected cells in each organ.

 This example corresponds to scenarios where users know the coarse cell type of a group of cells (nodes near the root of uHAF), but need to annotate their finer cell types.

 Case study 1: agile construction of a draft T cell metabolic landscape

 Using ECAUGT, we first sorted all cells in uGT with the label “T cell” and associated names (such as “CD4 T cell”, “CD8 T cell”, “Activated T cell”, etc.) across all organs (Figure S1A).

 Case study 2: in data discovery of side effects in targeted therapy

 Mapping uHAF names to cell ontology terms
We downloaded the basic Cell Ontology (Bard et al., 2005; Diehl et al., 2016) terms from the CL website (Cell Ontology - Summary | NCBO BioPortal (http://bioontology.org)), retained “Preferred Label”, “Definitions” and “Parents” (Table), and used the “Preferred Label” for CL term assignment. We converted the “uHAF_name” to “cl_name” by a combined strategy: We preferably used the Cell Ontology terms with the exact matching of the whole string of “cell_type”. For the “cell_type” that did not appear in the Cell Ontology terms, we further searched their parent “cell_type” in our uHAF until the Cell Ontology term was matched completely. For the remaining “cell_type”s, we manually determined the most similar Cell Ontology terms by ontologyIndex R package (Greene et al., 2017). If no term was found after these steps, we labeled them “none” (see Table S3).
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112636749)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112636749)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112636749&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ISCI.2022.104318)  
