
KibioR &amp; Kibio: a new architecture for next-generation data querying and sharing in big biology
===================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112043136]  
  
Publication date : 05 of March, 2021  

# Highlights

This publication presents two tools with a simple structure that can help any data provider,
organization or researcher, requiring a reliable data search and analysis base. The first tool is Kibio, a
scalable and adaptable data storage based on Elasticsearch search engine. The second tool is KibioR,
a R package to pull, push and search Kibio datasets or any accessible Elasticsearch-based databases.
These tools apply a uniform data exchange model and minimize the burden of data management by
organizing data into a decentralized, versatile, searchable and shareable structure.

Taking ES as the central piece of the structure, this paper proposes a
solution in two parts. The first part, Kibio, is a FAIR architecture using ES
technology for storing and exploring massive heterogeneous biological
dataset. The second part is a R package called KibioR, that enables high-
level data handling (import, export, download, upload, description, search
and join) and access to datasets already available in our public instances
of Kibio or in any accessible similar repository.

The vast majority of Kibio datasets has been integrated with KibioR (i.e.
import method) mainly with no transformation many datasets are already
available directly in tabular formats (see Supplementary Data 3). For those
that were not tabular (e.g. PubMed), we used several simple operations
such as flattening and aggregating nested attributes (e.g. foreign
identifiers) to ease the search process and usability with KibioR.  

Fig. 3. Case study 1: description of the chain of requests and intermediary results
when looking for potential tissue-specific drug effect of Metformin. We use 4
datasets and explore iteratively by reusing results inside new queries.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112043136)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112043136)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112043136&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTAB157)  
