
Pleiotropic Enhancers are Ubiquitous Regulatory Elements in the Human Genome
============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112639401]  
  
Publication date : 01 of May, 2022  

# Highlights

In this study we analyzed active enhancers across human organs based on the analysis of both eRNA transcription (FANTOM5 consortium data sets) and chromatin architecture (ENCODE consortium data sets). We show that pleiotropic enhancers are pervasive in the human genome and that most enhancers active in a particular organ are also active in other organs.

The fact that regulatory information within enhancer DNA can be dense and pleiotropic also illustrates regulatory complexity.

In addition, our analysis suggests that the proportion of context-specific enhancers of a given organ is explained, at least in part, by the proportion of context-specific genes in that same organ.


Given that organs are comprised of different cell types and that some cell types are present in multiple organs (e.g., fibroblasts and endothelial cells), the high proportion of pleiotropic enhancers calculated with bulk organ data could be a mere consequence of considering enhancers that are active in cell types common to many organs. To rule out this possibility, we analyzed enhancers identified in primary cell cultures by the FANTOM5 project 

These results indicate that ontogenetic proximity of cells influences enhancer pleiotropy.

The notion that such a high proportion of human enhancers can be pleiotropic suggests that small regions of regulatory DNA may contain abundant regulatory information and that these regions evolve under important evolutionary constraints, as was previously observed for some mammalian (Hiller et al. 2012; Fish et al. 2017) and human (Radke et al. 2021) pleiotropic enhancers.


Undoubtedly, this and other issues related to the structure and function of pleiotropic enhancers remain to be studied in detail.

We used the ABC predictions of enhancer-gene links (Fulco et al. 2019). The ABC model assigns a score to enhancer-gene pairs for different organs and cell types, and it is known to outperform other predictions, such as distance to the TSS, in this task.

GTEx biosamples were mapped to 18 organs (of the 20 ENCODE organs) using UBERON ontology (supplementary table S9, Supplementary Material online). We obtained similar results when standardizing for enhancer size (enhancer size was fixed to 500 bp).


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112639401)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112639401)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112639401&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/GBE/EVAC071)  
