
Wikidata and the bibliography of life
=====================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112959127]  
  
Publication date : 07 of July, 2022  

# Highlights

This article argues that Wikidata can be that database as it has flexible and sophisticated models of bibliographic information, and an active community of people and programs (“bots”) adding, editing, and curating that information.

There are several projects trying to redress this problem by digitising the taxonomic literature, ranging from global initiatives such as the Biodiversity Heritage Library (BHL) (Gwinn & Rinaldo, 2009) to extensive, regional repositories such as the Zoological-Botanical Database (ZOBODAT) 

There have been long standing calls for what Cameron (1997) described as a “universal citation database”. Recent developments such as the OpenCitations infrastructure (Peroni & Shotton, 2020) and the WikiCite project have brought us considerably closer to this goal.

In this article, I make the case for constructing the bibliography of life using Wikidata. I begin by providing background on Wikidata, describing how it models bibliographic data, and how it can be populated with data

A key motivation for including publications in Wikidata is to provide trustworthy sources of references for statements made in Wikidata.

Creating a bibliography of life would only be conceivable if much of the work of populating it could be automated, and if freely accessible sources of data were available. Bibliographic metadata from CrossRef and PubMed are constantly being added by automated tools (“bots”). 

There are also publications with persistent identifiers that are not DOIs (such as Handles), publications which lack persistent identifiers but are online, and publications which may not be online at all. There are various strategies we can use to gather bibliographic data for these publications. Below I describe some of these strategies. Source code for some of these approaches is available at https://github.com/rdmpage/wikidata-bibliographic-data.

Edits can also be made by automated programs (“bots”). Of the top ten editors of publications, half are bots (Fig. 5).

<!-- Nice visualizations of the data, vertical is better for these kind of ranks -->

. The way Wikidata models a given class of entities (such as “taxa” or “books”) is determined on an ad hoc basis by a self-assembling community of interested people. This can lead to multiple ways to do the same thing, which presents challenges to both editing and querying the data. While these quirks would be less likely in a domain-specific database, it is unlikely that such a database would have the level of community engagement we see in Wikidata.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112959127)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112959127)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112959127&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.7717/PEERJ.13712)  
