
Ontology Development Kit: a toolkit for building, maintaining, and standardising biomedical ontologies
======================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112942500]  
  
Publication date : 06 of July, 2022  

# Highlights
The Ontology Development Kit (ODK)
provides a set of standardised, customisable, and automatically executable workflows, and
packages all required tooling in a single Docker image. In this paper, we provide an overview
of how the ODK works, show how it is used in practice, and describe how we envision it driving
standardisation efforts in our community.

Over the years, some ontology communities developed their own workflows for managing the ontology lifecycle using a variety of tools and technical approaches. However, given the complexity of the technologies involved, it is very difficult for even the most experienced ontology pipeline
developers to maintain and extend these workflows.


. For example, there is currently no agreedupon metadata schema for reflecting contributions to ontology terms, which is critical not only
for attribution (grant proposals, individual editors) but more generally important for provenance
related questions (Who wrote that definition? Who suggested that term to be added?)

The ODK promotes a “convention-over-configuration” model by imposing a standardised
repository structure where all files are stored in predictable paths within the repository. This
ensures ontology editors are on familiar ground even if they work on multiple different
ontologies

We provide two distinct Docker images. The ODK-Lite (obolibrary/odklite) image contains only
the minimal set of tools needed by the standard workflows described in the next section.

These tests can easily be adopted by other version control
providers such as Bitbucket or GitLab, as long as they provide a way to run Docker-based
workflows. The QC tests are on the ODK Docker image via a Makefile target, “make test”.


For example, an organisation might have the requirement that new terms are always signed with a (valid) ORCID (23), so they
could implement a SPARQL query which looks for terms in the ontologies’ namespace that do
not have the respective annotation present and further checks that if the annotation is present
the annotation value is a valid ORCID. 

The ODK supports what is considered best practice in OBO, and aims to make it easy for
ontology editors to manage imports

The ODK supports templating systems such as Dead Simple Ontology Design Patterns
(DOSDP) (16) and ROBOT templates (

  
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112942500)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112942500)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112942500&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [arXiv ID](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2207.02056.pdf)  
