
Comparative cellular analysis of motor cortex in human, marmoset and mouse
==========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112289377]  
  
Publication date : 06 of October, 2021  

# Highlights

Few cell-type marker genes are conserved across species, revealing a short list of candidate genes and regulatory mechanisms that are responsible for conserved features of homologous cell types, such as the GABAergic chandelier cells. This consensus transcriptomic classification allows us to use patch–seq (a combination of whole-cell patch-clamp recordings, RNA sequencing and morphological characterization) to identify corticospinal Betz cells from layer 5 in non-human primates and humans, and to characterize their highly specialized physiology and anatomy.

The layer 5 (L5) region of carnivore and primate M1 contains specialized ‘giganto-cellular’ corticospinal neurons (Betz cells in primates12,13,14,15,16) 

To explore the evolutionary conservation and divergence of M1 cell types and their underlying molecular regulatory mechanisms, we analysed single-nucleus transcriptomic and epigenomic data from mouse, marmoset, macaque and human M1.


while L6 corticothalamic and L5 extratelencephalic neurons, including corticospinal neurons and Betz cells in primate M1, were significantly rarer in primates than in mice.

Primates had a unique oligodendrocyte population (Oligo SLC1A3 LOC103793418 in marmosets and Oligo L2-6 OPALIN MAP6D1 in humans) that was not a distinct cluster in mice (Extended Data Fig. 5c).

Epigenomic profiling of M1 cell types can reveal regulatory mechanisms of transcriptomic identity.

M1 lacks L4 as defined by a thin band of densely packed ‘granular’ neurons that is present in other cortical areas, such as MTG (Fig. 4a). However, prior studies have identified L4-like neurons in M1 on the basis of synaptic properties in mice32 and cell morphology and lack of SMI-32 labelling33 and expression of RORB34 (an L4 marker) in primates

Fig. 5: Chandelier neurons have a core set of conserved molecular features.

However, primate Betz/extratelencephalic neurons have distinctive gene-expression and electrophysiological features—including pauses, bursting and spike-frequency acceleration, which have been seen in cats but not in rodents17,18,41. The selection of an appropriate model organism is particularly relevant when studying Betz cells and other extratelencephalic neuronal types that are selectively vulnerable in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, some forms of frontotemporal dementia and other neurodegenerative conditions42,43.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112289377)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112289377)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112289377&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-021-03465-8)  
