
scMRMA: single cell multiresolution marker-based annotation
===========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112650824]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2022  

# Highlights

Here, we develop a bidirectional method, scMRMA, where a hierarchical reference guides iterative clustering and deep annotation with enhanced resolutions. 

 Automatic cell type annotation methods use a common strategy which projects a query against a reference unidirectionally to find the best match. The query is either a single cell or a cell cluster, and a reference is a collection of known cell types characterized by marker genes or transcriptomic profiles (7)

 CHEATH (18), Garnett (10) and CellO (23), in contrast, organize cell types hierarchically from broad to very specific, improving discrimination for specific cell types.

 We developed the ‘single cell Multiresolution Marker-based Annotation’ (scMRMA) algorithm, a bidirectional method that not only maps cell clusters against a hierarchical reference but the reference also guides cell clustering to identify distinctive subgroups for annotation.

 Some methods use marker genes to define known cell types in their reference, such as Garnett (10), CellAssign (14) and scCATCH (11). Those markers are panels of genes that uniquely identify cell types through literature or expert-curated knowledge databases like CellMarker (15), PanglaoDB (16) and CancerSEA (17).

 To build a hierarchical reference, we started from PanglaoDB, a maker-based database consisting of 178 cell types involving 3764 (human) and 3825 (mouse) marker genes in a flat structure (16). We used Cell Ontology (29,30) to reorganize the 176 cell types into a hierarchical structure. Cell ontology incorporates phenotypic information of cell types and is more comprehensive in its cellular detail than other resources.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112650824)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112650824)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112650824&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/NAR/GKAB931)  
