
NETME: on-the-fly knowledge network construction from biomedical literature
===========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112684497]  
  
Publication date : 06 of January, 2022  

# Highlights

We introduce a novel system called NETME, which, starting from a set of full-texts obtained from PubMed, through an easy-to-use web interface, interactively extracts biological elements from ontological databases and then synthesizes a network inferring relations among such elements. The results clearly show that our tool is capable of inferring comprehensive and reliable biological networks.



In the context of biology and biomedicine, the Biological Expression Language (BEL) (Slater 2014), or Resource Description Framework (RDF) (McBride 2004) have been widely applied to convert a text in semantic triplets having the following form: <subject, predicate, object>. The subject and object represent biological elements, whereas the predicate represents a logical or physical relationship between them (Szklarczyk et al. 2016; Himmelstein and Baranzini 2015).

A Knowledge Graph (also known as a semantic network) is a systematic way to connect information and data to knowledge. 

. To overcome this limitation, we developed a customized version of TAGME, called OntoTAGME, which makes use of several ontology and literature databases, such as: GeneOntology (GO) (Consortium 2004), DiseaseOntology (DO) (Schriml et al. 2018), (...) Cell Ontology (CL) (Diehl et al. 2016), Cell Line Ontology (CLO) (Sarntivijai et al. 2014),

Cell Ontology (CL) Diehl et al. (2016) is designed as a structured controlled vocabulary for cell types. This ontology covers cell types from prokaryotes to mammals. However, it excludes plant cell types. One of the main uses of the CL is to describe samples used in transcriptomic and functional genomics studies, such as FANTOM5, ENCODE and LINCS.

  
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112684497)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112684497)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112684497&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/S41109-021-00435-X)  
