
Single-cell reference mapping to construct and extend cell type hierarchies
===========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112991212]  
  
Publication date : 07 of July, 2022  

# Highlights
Specifically, individual studies often differ in terms of cell annotation terminology and depth, with different groups
specializing in different cell type compartments, often using distinct terminology.
Understanding how these distinct sets of annotations are related and complement each
other would mark a major step towards a consensus-based cell type annotation that reflects
the latest knowledge in the field. Whereas recent computational techniques, referred to as
“reference mapping” methods, facilitate the usage and expansion of existing reference
atlases by mapping new datasets (i.e. queries) onto an atlas; a systematic approach towards
harmonizing dataset-specific cell type terminology and annotation depth is still lacking.

. Here,we present “treeArches”, a framework to automatically build and extend reference atlases
while enriching them with an updatable hierarchy of cell type annotations across different
datasets.

The concept of a “reference”
suggests it should help analyze and interpret new datasets (called “query”). 

As a result, users can contextualize their datasets within these references
to identify novel cell types from healthy to disease-specific variations and thus enabling the
discovery of disease-affected cell types that can be prioritized for treatment design.
However, identifying novel unseen cell types requires expert knowledge and additional data
analysis.

Databases such as the Cell Ontology try to overcome this problem, but a
complete naming convention is still missing [13]. Learning the relation between cell types
could even be used to improve the Cell Ontology database.

To address these challenges, we propose a framework building upon recent approaches for
reference mapping called single-cell architectural surgery (scArches) [1] and single-cell
Hierarchical Progressive Learning (scHPL) [14] to progressively build and update a
reference atlas and corresponding hierarchical classifier (treeArches, see Methods)

The
query datasets can either be labeled or unlabeled. In the case of a labeled dataset, we
match the cell types from the query to the reference and again update the hierarchy we had
learned on the reference datasets. In the case of an unlabeled query, we annotate the cells
using the learned hierarchy.

The constructed tree looks almost completely as we would expect: most cell types
are matched (e.g. the CD4+ T cells from all three datasets) and cell types that are only found
in one dataset are added as new cell types to the tree (e.g. the CD10+ B cells and
erythrocytes).

Two mistakes are that the plasma
cells and the megakaryocyte progenitors are added to the tree as new cell types. These cell
types contain 21 and 18 cells respectively, which makes them difficult to match compared to
the other cell types in the query dataset which contain more than 1000 cells on average.

For some parts of the tree, e.g. the airway epithelium secretory cells, the matches are not
what we would expect based on the names (Fig 2C). The secretory goblet cells from the
query dataset match not only the goblet but also the club cells from the reference and the
secretory club cells match the transitional club-AT2 cells. This cell type has only been
recently discovered, which could explain why it is missing from the original Meyer
annotations [24–26].

<!-- There seems to be a mix of "cell type" and "cell cluster" terminology -->

For some, such as some macrophage subtypes that are seen as new, it is a bit more difficult to
determine whether they are new or whether they should match one of the macrophage
subtypes in the tree. The ‘Macro CHIT1’ cells from the Meyer dataset, for instance, form a
relatively big cell type of 1570 cells and are still seen as new

The B cells and plasma cells from the reference and Meyer dataset,
for instance, could not be matched automatically, which is caused by the plasma cells in the
Meyer dataset that are partially misannotated (Fig S6).

Figure 2. Updated hierarchy when adding Meyer to the reference atlas. (a) Cell type hierarchy
corresponding to the reference atlas (only the first two levels are shown). Each node represents a cell
type in the reference atlas instead of a cell type in a separate dataset of the reference atlas

f) Expression of SPP1 in the different cell types of the referenceand query datasets

<!-- "Cell type" is used indistinctly for cell "types" and "states". The terminology is indeed confusing. Maybe using "cell classes" is a  -->

We construct a cell type hierarchy for the motor cortex of the brain using
human, mouse, and marmoset data (Table S3) [30].

Here, we only focus on this subset to make the results less
cluttered. Almost all cell types are a perfect match, except for ‘Meis2’ and ‘Sncg’. In the
latent space, the Meis2 cell types from mouse and marmoset also show no overlap, and
both cell types were defined using different marker genes (Fig S9A-B).

In this study, we present treeArches, a method to create and extend a reference atlas and
the corresponding cell type hierarchies.

The HLCA reference atlas consists of 16
datasets with a well-defined cell type hierarchy. We show that treeArches can be used to
extend this hierarchy. For instance, by increasing the resolution of some branches of the
tree, but also by adding new cell types. We could also detect diseased cell types in the IPF
datasets.

In summary, we present treeArches, a method that can be used to combine multiple labeled
datasets to create or extend a reference atlas and the corresponding cell type hierarchy.
This way we provide users with an easy-to-use pipeline to map new datasets to a current
reference atlas, match cell types across multiple labeled datasets, and consistently label
cells in new datasets. 


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112991212)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112991212)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112991212&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.07.499109)  
