
GeneMarkeR: A Database and User Interface for scRNA-seq Marker Genes
====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112638124]  
  
Publication date : 26 of October, 2021  

# Highlights

An R Shiny web tool called GeneMarkeR was developed for researchers to retrieve marker genes demonstrating cell type specificity across species, methodology and sample types based on a novel algorithm. The web tool facilitates online submission and interfaces with MySQL to ensure updatability. 

Therefore, the primary focus of this manuscript is to provide a resource to document the marker genes that were consistently identified across species, samples, sequencing technologies, and sources.

Two MySQL databases were generated to store: 1) the standardized, manually curated statistical results and metadata and 2) the robust marker genes, while an R Shiny reactive user-interface is provided to access the data. The development of the publicly accessible GeneMarkeR database and user-interface is described in this manuscript.

The 120 distinct cell types extracted from the publications were mapped to Cell Ontology terms using EMBL-EBI’s Ontology Lookup Service and Ontobee. Additional cell types were added to the network structure to ensure specific cell types accurately mapped back to parent nodes (i.e., naïve cell and somatic cell). Redundant terms (i.e., cell types that mapped in multiple branches) were pruned by removing cyclic relationships manually. Intermediate nodes that lacked branching and did not add value to the classification were manually removed. Intermediate nodes with branches were retained as these are crucial to build out the tree as cell types from new datasets are added. The cell type hierarchy of Cell Ontology was built via the JavaScript package “visNetwork” implemented in R with an abbreviated version shown in Figure 1A. The cell hierarchy enables us to consider if genes were specific for higher-level cell type terms vs. cell subtypes.

There are two databases behind GeneMarkeR shown in Figure 3, they are both implemented in MySQL to ensure data integrity, standardization, and ease of data updates over time.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112638124)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112638124)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112638124&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/FGENE.2021.763431)  
