
Dorsal Root Ganglion Neuron Types and Their Functional Specialization
=====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112304779]  
  

# Highlights

Because of this, a comprehensive classification of DRG neurons is critical for determining exactly how somatosensation works and for providing insights into cell types involved during chronic pain. This article reviews the recent advances in unbiased classification of molecular types of DRG neurons in the perspective of known functions as well as predicted functions based on gene expression profiles. 

The new classification scheme will be instructive in determining the exact cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying somatosensation, facilitating the development of rational strategies to identify causes for chronic pain.

e data show that sensory neurons are organized in a basal
structure of three cold-sensitive neuron types, five mechano-heat sensitive nociceptor
types, four A-Low threshold mechanoreceptor types, five itch-mechano-heat–sensitive
nociceptor types and a single C–low-threshold mechanoreceptor type with a strong
relation between molecular neuron types and functional types.
\
For DRG sensory neurons,
two main morphologically defined neuronal subtypes were initially identified: the large
light and the small dark neurons.

Thus, single-cell RNA sequencing is more likely to identify
cell types correctly than more biased strategies, such as the use of morphological or
neurophysiological parameters, which contains markedly fewer and less quantitative
features that can be used to accurately identify neuron types.

Three types of “nonpeptidergic
neurons” were identified, termed NP1, NP2, and NP3. However, NP2 and NP3 neuronal
types contain markers for both peptidergic neurons (i.e., neuropeptides)

the first including Trpm8 and PEP classes of neurons (Trpm8.1,
Trpm8.2, Trpm8.3, PEP1.1, PEP1.2, PEP1.3, PEP1.4, PEP2); the second A-LTMRs and
proprioceptors (NF1, NF2, NF3, NF4); and the last C-LTMR (TH), nonpeptidergic (NP1.1,
NP1.2), Mrgpra3 (NP2.1, NP2.2), and Sst/Nts-containing cluster (NP3) (Figure 1)

At the molecular level, mechano-heat neurons can be regarded as peptidergic (PEP), as
substance P (Tac1) is one of the most commonly used neuropeptides to identify this
neuronal population.

v1 is abundantly expressed in the peptidergic PEP1.1, PEP1.2,
PEP1.3, PEP1.4 neurons and in NP3, indicating these to be critical for inflammatory
hyperalgesia. Trpa1 is expressed in NP1.1, NP1.2, and a proportion of PEP1.2 and
PEP1.4, while Trpm3 is low and only in some cells of NP1.1, NP1.2, and peptidergic
PEP1.1, PEP1.2, PEP1.3, PEP1.4 neurons. Thus, there are various combinations of
coexpression, with neurons among the PEP1.2 and PEP1.4 populations expressing all
three channels


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112304779)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112304779)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112304779&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/OXFORDHB/9780190860509.013.4)  
 * [Full text URL](https://www.oxfordhandbooks.com/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780190860509.001.0001/oxfordhb-9780190860509-e-4)  
