
A 3D transcriptomics atlas of the mouse nose sheds light on the anatomical logic of smell
=========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q112645262]  
  
Publication date : 01 of March, 2022  

# Highlights
Odorant receptor genes (Olfrs) are continuously distributed over at least five zones

The spatial location of odorant receptor genes (Olfrs) in the nose is thought to be independent of the structural diversity of the odorants they detect. Using spatial transcriptomics, we create a genome-wide 3D atlas of the mouse olfactory mucosa (OM).

OSNs expressing the same Olfr share similar odorant response profiles (Malnic et al., 1999; Nara et al., 2011) and drive their axons to the same glomeruli in the olfactory bulb (Mombaerts et al., 1996; Ressler et al., 1994; Vassar et al., 1994). Thus, Olfrs define functional units in the olfactory system and function as genetic markers to discriminate between different mature OSN subtypes (Ibarra-Soria et al., 2017; Saraiva et al., 2015b).

Another remarkable feature of the OSN subtypes is their spatial distribution in the OM. Early studies postulated that OSNs expressing different Olfrs are spatially segregated into four broad areas within the OM, called “zones,” and which define hemicylindrical rings with different radii (Ressler et al., 1993; Vassar et al., 1993).

Molecular markers for all canonical cell types known to populate the mouse OM were detected in all axes (Figure 1E) and expressed at the expected levels (Saraiva et al., 2015b).

In the last 3 decades, multiple genes with spatially segregated expression patterns across the OM have been identified


GO Enrichment analyses were performed using the GOrilla online tool (http://cbl-gorilla.cs.technion.ac.il) with the option “Two unranked lists of genes (target and background lists)”. For each axis, we used as background list the list of the genes we tested.

To perform cell type deconvolution analysis, we used a previously published single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) data from the mouse OM (Fletcher et al., 2017)

All odorant structures and associated CAS numbers were retrieved from either Sigma-Aldrich (www.sigmaaldrich.com) or PubChem (https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). 

RNA-seq raw data have been deposited and are publicly available as of the date of publication at ArrayExpress: E-MTAB-10211. 

As we showed above, our Tomo-seq data enable a systematic and quantitative estimation of gene expression levels along the three axes of the OM. Here, we take this analysis one step further and generate a fully browsable tridimensional (3D) gene expression atlas of the mouse OM

he first gene validated was Cytl1, which we confirmed to be expressed along the septum throughout the OM (Figures 3C and 3D), consistent with the role Cytl1 plays in osteogenesis, chondrogenesis, and bone and cartilage homeostasis (Shin et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2019). The four additional genes (Olfr309, Olfr618, Olfr727, and Moxd2) validated via ISH are presented elsewhere in this manuscript (Figures 4, 5, and S4).

In particular, the positive correlation of the 3D indices with Kam (Figure 6D) indicates that the most soluble odorants (lower) preferentially activate Olfrs located in the most antero-dorsomedial region (zone 1) of the OM, while the least soluble odorants (higher Kam) activate Olfrs in the postero-ventrolateral region (zones 4 to 5). In other words, gradients of odorants sorption (as defined by their Kam) correlate with the gradients of Olfr expression from zone 1 to zone 5, consistent with the chromatographic/sorption hypothesis in olfaction (Mozell, 1966; Scott et al., 2014).

ISH studies suggested that the total number of Olfr expression zones can vary between mammals—ranging from two in macaque (Horowitz et al., 2014) to four in rat (Vassar et al., 1993) and goat (Octura et al., 2018), and between four and nine in mouse (Miyamichi et al., 2005; Ressler et al., 1993; Zapiec and Mombaerts, 2020). While the exact number of Olfr expression zones in OM still remains under debate, our results are consistent with both another recent RNA-seq study (Tan and Xie, 2018) and the largest Olfr ISH study in the mouse OM (Miyamichi et al., 2005), thus supporting the existence of at least five overlapping Olfr expression zones in the mouse nose.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q112645262)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q112645262)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q112645262&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELREP.2022.110547)  
