
Representing Physician Suicide Claims as Nanopublications: Proof-of-Concept Study Creating Claim Networks
=========================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q113714833]  
  
Publication date : 01 of July, 2022  

# Highlights

A list of articles from a previously published scoping literature review on physician suicide was used to identify those articles that commented on or investigated suicidal behaviors of physician populations, including students, postgraduate trainees, and practicing physicians

A set of 49 claims concerning the rate of US physician suicide was represented as nanopublications. Analysis of the claim network revealed that (1) the network is not fully connected, (2) no single primary source of the claim could be identified, and (3) all end-point citations had a claim with no further citation, had no apparent claim, or could not be accessed to verify the claim. The nanopublication strategy also enabled the capture of variant claims published on a website.

A similar approach to identify and trace citation distortion had previously been carried out regarding a specific scientific claim about Alzheimer disease [11]. This paper extends this work by applying the nanopublication schema to the same physician suicide claim.

Facilitating the integration, interoperability, and findability of high-quality research on physician suicide would benefit evidence-based policies and interventions in suicide prevention among physicians.

Then, 1 author (TIL) established a Google Scholar alert using the keyword “physician suicide” and screened additional articles from peer-reviewed journals to include based on earlier established inclusion criteria from the published scoping literature review [7]. These articles, published through March 2020, were identified and added to the article set used for this study.

A nanopublication index was then created containing all created nanopublications.


Figure 2. Nanopublications linked by their claims, if made, and nanopublications cited as source of the claim, if available. Nanopublications appearing in light gray with dashed lines represent an article or resource that states a claim about annual physician suicide rate but provides no further references.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q113714833)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q113714833)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q113714833&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2196/34979)  
