
Leveraging Wikidata to Build Scholarly Profiles as Service
==========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q113399929]  
  
Publication date : 27 of July, 2022  

# Highlights
he University Library (UL) of the Indiana University–Purdue  University  Indianapolis  (IUPUI)  campus  has  been  an  early  adopter  of  open-source  platforms  and  efforts  to  advance  open  knowledge  and  is  committed  to  making  scholarship  openly  accessible  to  a  broader  community  of  users  (IUPUI  University  Library  2019)  through,  in  part,  its  commitment  to  open  knowledge  projects  (IUPUI  University  Library  Center  for  Digital  Scholarship  2021).  

Wikidata offers an opportunity for extending the reach of scholars’ works and connecting them with other research while also making the data available in a format that  is  easily  accessible  and  reusable.  The  library  leverages  the  power  of  Wikidata  to  build  profiles  for  scholars that may be less visible or systematically underserved in other systems. This article shares the methods, approach, and priorities that inform a Scholarly Profiles as Service (SPaS) model at Indiana University–Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI), a campus that includes 3,693 people with academic positions.

Academic  institutions  often  rely  on  proprietary  software  and  services  to  maintain  researchers’ profiles and research funding (e.g., Pure by Elsevier, Pivot by ProQuest, and Activity Insight by Digital  Measures)  (“Comparison  of  Research  Networking  Tools  and  Research  Profiling  Systems”  2021). 

However, open-source tools to support this work are available and openly accessible, and their use aligns with  UL’s  commitment  to  advancing  openness.  These  tools  include  ReCiter  (“Wcmc-Its/ReCiter”  2021),  VIVO, DSpace-CRIS, and Scholia. ReCiter, developed by the Weill Cornell Medical College, is an author disam-biguation  system  that  uses  a  machine  learning  process  and  available  identity  data  to  generate  bibliogra-phies.

It maintains publication lists of scholars by extracting data from PubMed or Scopus (Johnson et al. 2014;  Albert  et  al.  2021).  VIVO  and  DSpace-CRIS  are  tools  for  displaying  researcher  profiles  (Obeid  et  al.  2014;  Mornati  2019).  In  contrast,  Scholia,  a  free  web-based  application,  builds  researcher  profiles  from  data  retrieved  from  Wikidata  (Nielsen,  Mietchen,  and  Willighagen  2017).  The  rendering  of  these  profiles  is  dynamic  because  the  application  queries  the  Wikidata  Query  Service  and  directly  displays  the  most  up-to-date information available for a particular subject.

Case Study: Scholarly Profiles as Service (SPaS)

en the efforts of the global community are supplemented by targeted institutional approaches (like those described here), Scholia profiles can have comparably complete  coverage.  The  Scholia  service  not  only  generates  the  profiles  to  make  it  easier  for  users  to  access  and  analyze  Wikidata’s  data,  but  it  also  provides  links  to  external  tools  that  can  be  used  to  enhance the data of a particular section. 

The concept for the development and implementation of the Scholarly Profiles as Service (SPaS) model at IUPUI emerged after a pilot project conducted by UL in the summer of 2017 (“Wikidata:WikiProject IUPUI University Library” 2021). This pilot afforded us the opportunity to explore the potential of Wikidata and Scholia as free and open solutions for scholarly profiles, for which the Lilly Family School of Philanthropy was chosen as a use case.

Figure 2: Schema created in OpenRefine containing core properties and constant values for the creation of entries to represent IUPUI scholars.





# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q113399929)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q113399929)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q113399929&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.18357/KULA.171)  
