
Unifying the Identification of Biomedical Entities with the Bioregistry
=======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q113009731]  
  
Publication date : 10 of July, 2022  

# Highlights
The Bioregistry can be used to support the standardized annotation of data, models, ontologies, and scientific literature, thereby promoting their interoperability and reuse. The Bioregistry can be accessed through https://bioregistry.io and its source code and data are available under the MIT and CC0 Licenses at https://github.com/biopragmatics/bioregistry.

Similarly, many biomedical resources 46 construct local unique identifiers for the same entity in the Enzyme Commission identifier resource differently, e.g., 1.4.-.- in the Gene Ontology (GO)10, 1.4.* in ChEBI, and 1.4 in IntEnz11 47 for Oxidoreductases acting on the CH-NH2 group of 48 donors.

trolled repository, and relies on free, publicly 77 available infrastructure for semi-automated quality control and deployment. Third, a community-driven registry solicits 78 contributions from community members and provides an appropriate technical platform and governance structure to support
79 this. This technical platform needs to support discussion and feedback as well as quality assurance workflows tightly coupled to 80 the underlying open data, code, and infrastructure. Overall, these properties are expected to promote the sustainability 81 longevity of the registry

he Bioregistry (0.5.36) integrates content from and aligns 20 external registries and contains 1,410 individual records.

). In addition, the Bioregistry curates 9 prefix synonyms 166 (e.g., NCBI_Taxon_id, uniprot.taxonomy, NCBI_taxid) that appear in various non-registry biomedical resources, 167 demonstrating the high heterogeneity of usages for a given identifier resource. Such cross-registry mappings and synonyms  168 in the Bioregistry enable it to act as an interoperability layer to standardize across a large number of external registries and 169 non-registry resources.

Manubot initially added support for  700 CURIE prefixes by incorporating Identifiers.org but later switched to the Bioregistry.

s. Besides being more comprehensive, the Bioregistry’s open contribution model allowed for
256 addressing several longstanding issues with Identifiers.org including invalid regular expression patterns, missing prefixes, as well as inconsistencies due to some namespaces being redundantly embedded in identifiers.

The Integrated Network and Dynamical Reasoning Assembler (INDRA)9 assembles biomedical knowledge from multiple
 databases combined with text mining of scientific publications to construct executable models. When performing assembly,
 INDRA maintains references to biomedical entities that are grounded to one or more identifier resources. It uses the Bioregistry to first check that the prefixes used in these groundings are standardized, and then to validate the associated unique local identifier according to the pattern provided by the Bioregistry. This validation is critical for maintaining consistency in INDRA’s automated assembly workflows.

Following the initial development, deployment, and early adoption of the Bioregistry, two ongoing challenges remain. The first is to be responsive in the maintenance, enrichment, and extension of the content in the registry to best reflect the reality of the ever-changing landscape of biomedical identifier resources. 

Finally, we envision the potential adoption of the Bioregistry by academic publishers to support the standardized annotation
of named entities in the text provided by authors (e.g., with BioFactoid56
374 ), and thereby decrease the need for doing expensive
375 and error-prone post-processing like automated named entity recognition on publications to create structured representations.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q113009731)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q113009731)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q113009731&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.08.499378)  
