
What is a cell type and how to define it?
=========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q113222973]  
  
Publication date : 01 of July, 2022  

# Highlights

I propose a roadmap toward a conceptual framework and knowledge base of cell types that will enable a deeper understanding of the dynamic changes of cellular function under healthy and diseased conditions.

Studies over the past century have revealed that cells within an organism can be grouped into types—cells within a type exhibit similar structure and function that are distinct from cells in other types (Arendt, 2008).

<!-- "Within an organism" is less the focus of the Arendt paper than "within the sum of organisms of a species" -->

However, there has not been a consistent and standard definition of cell types, although it is critical for reproducible investigation. It is often unclear if cell types defined by different phenotypic features agree with each other nor which feature is the right one to define cell types. Furthermore, lacking a systematic approach and effort, we do not know if all the cell types in an organism have been identified and where gaps may be.

<!-- There are two different tasks at hand that seem to be mixed in this sentence: (1) defining the concept of "cell type" itself and (2) coming up with defintions for each of the different types of cell.  -->

In this review, I will mainly use the mammalian brain as an example (but also refer to other organs or species) to address key questions pertaining to the conceptual and operational definition of cell types.

Transcriptomics by single-cell or single-nucleus RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq or snRNA-seq) is now the most widely used approach to generate cell type taxonomies o

A cell’s morphology (i.e., shape) and connectivity (especially for neurons) has been regarded as the most defining feature of brain cell types since the era of Cajal, although its place may be overtaken by transcriptome (for reasons detailed below). 

Most critically, these various approaches need to be integrated to achieve a coherent understanding of cell types and their function and to resolve issues such as which approach(es) (e.g., between transcriptomics and connectomics) can define cell types more clearly.


Overall, application of these approaches to characterize cell types in different brain regions and tissue organs as well as across species has begun to reveal generalizable organizing principles of cell types. Below, I will discuss the large body of studies supporting these principles and then conclude with a proposed roadmap based on these principles for taking a multilevel, iterative approach to define cell types and build an overarching knowledge base of cell types across the brain and body, across lifespan and across species.

The concept of cell types needs to be established based on where cell types originated and how they have diversified. Cell type classification has been compared with species classification (Stadler et al., 2021; Tanay and Sebé-Pedrós, 2021; Zeng and Sanes, 2017)

 There have been several ways proposed to classify species. One is based on the notion of reproductive isolation.

 <!-- Also mixing the ways to "define species" and the ways to "define each of the species" -->

However, this approach is not universally implementable, and many exceptions have been found. A more fruitful approach is phylogenetic analysis, that is, comparing the relatedness between species using a wide range of structural and functional phenotypic features. Such analysis has led to the foundational “tree of life” as we understand it today.

<!-- Now it is adding a third, separate things from the mix, which is "organizing species in a systematic way". It "comparesthe relatedness between species", but says very little about where the boundary is for a each of the species (at least for animals).  -->


It has been proposed that the formation of new cell type identity requires the evolution of a unique cell type regulatory signature that includes a cell type-specific core regulatory complex (CoRC) 

Thus, this approach appears to make sense; it is not coincidental but strongly supports the notion that transcriptomes harbor the molecular genetic code for cell type identity.

Furthermore, species mostly diverged millions of years ago, as did cellular identities. Cell type homologies between related species are often discernible only at a relatively coarse level which do not fully capture the biological complexity. 

Therefore, the first and foremost principle is that cell types are the product of evolution and cell type identities are encoded in the genome. 

Like phylogenomics for species classification, transcriptomic (and epigenomic) classification is a good proxy of cell type classification as the gene regulatory mechanisms that encode and maintain cell type identities are embedded in the transcriptomes and epigenomes.

<!-- Not really, these methods are similar to the numerical taxonomy based on traits than phylogenomics itself -->

This core concept has led to a systematic delineation of the relationship between cell types both within a species and, increasingly, across species. At the same time, cell type conservation may be imposed more by function than natural selection directly as in organismal evolution

The first (highest) level of branches is the separation of neuronal and various non-neuronal cell classes (Figure 2A). For neurons, the second level of branches is driven by major brain structures/regions, and the third level comprises various cell subclasses and types within each major brain structure, although there may be cell types crossing or shared between brain structures due to cell migration during development.

<!-- Figure shows an hierarchy. Cell types do not form a single hierarchy. Common oversimplification. -->

Within each of these major brain structures, there are multiple regions and subregions, each with many cell types. A cell type can be specific to a subregion, a region, or a major brain structure.

Here, I use isocortex (or simply called cortex) as an example to illustrate the organization of cell types within a major brain structure. Isocortex is composed of multiple cortical areas, each mediating sensory, motor, or associational functions. 


∼110 transcriptomic cell types in each cortical area (Brain Initiative Cell Census Network, 2021; Tasic et al., 2018). This organization is highly consistent with the existing knowledge about cortical cell types that have been extensively studied in a variety of phenotypic modalities over the past 50 years 

Compared between the two brain structures, the glutamatergic cell types in isocortex and HPF are highly distinct from each other; however, they also display one-to-one homology at subclass level suggesting a similar evolutionary origin (Yao et al., 2021b). This homologous relationship suggests that parallel neural networks can be formed by homologous sets of cell types.


 One way to better understand the significance of the continuous variation is to examine how it correlates with other modalities of cell type properties (see below).
 

 Like comparative genomics for species classification, single-cell transcriptomics is highly effective for cross-species comparison of cell types to reveal their evolutionary relationships. 

 Cell types are also considered to be the basic functional units of an organism. For the categorization of cell types based on their transcriptomes to be meaningful and to understand their relevance to the structure and function of the tissue organ where the cells reside, it is necessary to characterize other modalities of cellular properties.

  molecular profiles and anatomical distribution patterns (laminar specificity and mosaicism) are well correlated with visual response properties 

  Other MERFISH studies of neuron types in hypothalamus or nucleus accumbens also reveal strong correlation between transcriptomic specificity and anatomical/subregional specificity 

  Systematic investigation of connectivity among transcriptomic types at synaptic level and relating them to conventional studies where morphology and individual molecular markers were used to identify cell types is much needed to better understand the connectional specificity between transcriptomic types.

  In summary, for a definition of cell types to be meaningful, it must be associated with what cell types do.
  A transcriptomic cell type taxonomy must be linked to anatomical and functional information to evaluate the validity of the transcriptomic taxonomy and determine the appropriate level of granularity (since in theory, transcriptomic clusters can be infinitely subdivided, and the more cells profiled, the more clusters can be obtained).

  On the other hand, it is also reasonable to propose that some connectional or functional properties should not be used to define cell types because they may be emerging properties arising from the interaction of a network of cell types or from experience and/or activity-dependent processes that represent a cell state rather than a defining feature for a cell type.

  Figure 4. Dynamic changes of cell types and states during development, aging, and various physiological or pathological contexts

  <!-- Interesting image -->

  More often, emergence of a new cell type during development is the consequence of cell division from which a daughter cell takes up a new cell type identity (Figure 4). 

  Cell types versus cell states
A key question arising when evaluating a transcriptomic taxonomy is whether some clusters actually represent a particular cell state—a transient or dynamically responsive property of a cell to a context—rather than a cell type, as a cell type can exist in different states. This is a difficult question to address since most of the phenotypic measurements including the single-cell transcriptome are only a one-time snapshot of the cell. 

The distinction between cell types and cell states is particularly challenging during development, as cells continually change their states, and at certain key time points, they may switch their cell type identities. 


In addition to these general principles, it is worth noting the many kinds of complexity already encountered. The development of a cell type may not follow a simple trajectory but involves multiple steps of divergent or convergent differentiation (Shekhar et al., 2022)

Second, we need to conduct comprehensive anatomical, physiological, and functional studies of transcriptomic types using approaches that allow molecular identification of the cells under study (Figures 1A and 1B). Such studies will help to resolve differing opinions in lumping or splitting cell types and provide rationales for determining the appropriate level of granularity in defining cell types.

Ultimately, this knowledge base of cell types, interweaving cell type function, development, and evolution, will provide the blueprint of life to enable a deeper understanding of the dynamic changes of cellular function under a wide range of healthy and diseased conditions, and lead to innovations that improve human health in many ways.



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q113222973)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q113222973)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q113222973&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2022.06.031)  
