
OK Google, What Is Your Ontology? Or: Exploring Freebase Classification to Understand Google's Knowledge Graph
==============================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q113181051]  
  
Publication date : 10 of May, 2018  

# Highlights
The Freebase knowledge base was a major Semantic Web and linked data technology that was acquired by Google in 2010 to support the Google Knowledge Graph, the backend for Google search results that include structured answers to queries instead of a series of links to external resources. After its shutdown in 2016, Freebase is contained in a data dump of 1.9 billion Resource Description Format (RDF) triples.

These findings will provide a glimpse into the proprietary blackbox Knowledge Graph and what is meant by Google's mission to "organize the world's information and make it universally accessible and useful".

In 2007, Freebase, available at freebase.com (see Figure 2), was launched by Metaweb as
an open and collaborative knowledge base [3]. On the website, users could register a free
account and edit the data of various entries, creating linkages between entities in the data.
This was similar to the kind of editing and data entry that was possible on Wikipedia. A
significant difference was that while Wikipedia predominantly consists of free-form text
suitable for an article, Freebase encoded links and relationships between entities in the
knowledge base.

In 2010, Metaweb was acquired by Google for an undisclosed sum [13]. Freebase
data was then used to power their internal Knowledge Graph to support Google Search
features such as the Knowledge Panels (see Figure 1) [15]. On December 16, 2014, it
was announced on the Freebase Google Plus page that Freebase would be gradually shut
down over the next six months, and its data would be migrated to Wikidata [10]. In
reality, the Freebase service was closed from any further edits by its users and finally
shut down on May 2, 2016 [8]. From this date onward, all freebase.com URLs began to
redirect to the Google Developers page for the project where a data dump of Freebase
data is available.

<!-- Very nice description of the history of Freebase -->

Object - A Freebase object is a globally unique identifier that is a representation
in Freebase of something in the world. This broad definition allows arbitrary things to
be represented in the data. A tangible thing, such as the person Barack Obama, or an
abstract thing, such as the number “5”, can be represented by a Freebase object.

Type - A Freebase type is used to express the concept of a class. According to Freebase idiomatic usage, it is said that a Freebase object “has X, Y, Z types”

Property - A Freebase property is a relation that describes how an object can be
linked to other values or objects.

Property Detail - A property detail refers to the constraints on what objects or values
can be linked through a property. 

Ontology - For this paper, the Freebase ontology is the formal structure and description of the types, properties and property details that specify how objects can be related
to one another. This definition adapts the definition by Noy and McGuinness that “an
ontology is a formal explicit description of concepts in a domain of discourse (classes
(sometimes called concepts)), properties of each concept describing various features and
attributes of the concept (slots (sometimes called roles or properties)), and restrictions
on slots (facets (sometimes called role restrictions))...An ontology together with a set of
individual instances of classes constitutes a knowledge base” [14]. An implementation
detail is that this ontology is also expressed as RDF triples (e.g. by saying “Place of Birth
- is a - property”).

Noy and McGuiness state there is a distinction between “the ontology” and “the set
of individual instances of classes”, but also advise that in practice “there is a fine line
where the ontology ends and the knowledge base begins”[14]. For example, as Obama is
an instance of the Person and US President types (classes), the RDF triples that express
this would be considered as part of the knowledge base and not the ontology.

5.1. Freebase’s Type System

The notion of incompatibility arises in the Freebase system to express how an object
can have certain types which necessarily exclude it from having other types

Freebase does not implement inheritance in its types. Although there is a Person type and a Film Actor type in Freebase, the latter does not inherit from the former.

However, how can a triple express an estimated, uncertain, or null value? There must be
a way to express “unknown” (there is some value, but it is either not known or uncertain)
and “null” (there is definitely not a value; it is undefined) values in Freebase and the
Knowledge Graph. These are called “Has Value” (HV) and “Has No Value” (HNV) value
notations respectively

The New York Times business reporter Rachel Abrams discovered the problems associated with merging and splitting firsthand through a KP that displayed her Date of
Death was five years ago (see Figure 5). [1]. What occurred here was that the Google
KG had merged data on the living reporter Rachel Abrams with another deceased Rachel
Abrams. Abrams was in a position to publish an article about her journey in addressing the issue as an end user (and also the very subject of the KP), but the underlying
merge/split operations were hidden inside the blackbox of Google’s KG.

This section’s colourful title concerns how Freebase deals with “merging” duplicate objects (doppelgangers) and “splitting” conflated objects (chimeras).

This paper has explored select parts of the Freebase ontology and architecture to discover
how they can be related to Bowker and Star’s general findings on classification schemes.
Three parts of the overall architecture were considered: the Freebase type system and
its lack of inheritance and reliance on incompatibility, the implementation that allows
representation of uncertainty in values, and the implementation of merging and splitting
objects. In addition, a small correlational study was conducted to test a hypothesis based
on a hunch motivated by Bowker and Star. To a large extent, many of the characteristics found in classification systems were also found in the ontology and architecture of
Freebase. There are “hacks” and workarounds in the system that implement features to
make it possible for Google to minimize the potential damage from embarrassing KPs
and promote Google’s features as an attractive destination for the end user. These “security” features are implemented in an environment of linked data, where users can hop
back and forth between entities and their relationships with other entities


By organizing the world’s information, Google is expressing the searchable world in billions of RDF triples that conform to the KG system’s implemented ontology and architecture. Associated with this view of information are the issues with the
ontology/architecture that were mentioned in this paper.

This paper ends in the same way it started, by invoking the special phrase to say: “OK Google, let’s do more research.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q113181051)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q113181051)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q113181051&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1805.03885)  
 * [Full text URL](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1805.03885.pdf)  
 * [arXiv ID](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1805.03885.pdf)  
