
Building a knowledge graph to enable precision medicine

==========
  
  [@wikidata:Q113044292]  
  

# Highlights

In addition, PrimeKG supports artificial intelligence analyses of how drugs might target disease-associated molecular perturbations by containing an abundance of ‘indications’, ‘contradictions’, and ‘off-label use’ drug-disease edges lacking in other knowledge graphs

Many researchers have developed knowledge graphs for individual diseases that have
helped advance computational precision medicine within their respective disease area27–42. Nevertheless, the costs and extended timelines of these individual efforts demonstrate a need for a
systematic data resource that could unify existing biomedical knowledge to enable the investigation of diseases at scale.

s. Although only three subtypes of autism have be clinically identified, the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS)46 describes 192, the Monarch Disease Ontology
(MONDO)44 describes 37, and Orphanet48 describes 6.

To construct the network structure of PrimeKG, we merged the harmonized primary data resources
into a graph and extracted it’s largest connected component as shown in Figure 2c. We integrated
the various processed, curated datasets and cleaned the graph by dropping NaN and duplicate
edges, adding reverse edges, dropping duplicates again and removing self loops. This version
of the knowledge graph is available on our Harvard Dataverse as ‘kg raw.csv’. 

As demonstrated in our case study of autism, disease concepts in MONDO may not correlate well
with medical subtypes. MONDO contains many repetitive disease entities with no apparent clinical
correlation. For this reason, we were motivated to group diseases in MONDO into medically
relevant entities.

. Then, after applying an empirically chosen cutoff of similarity ≥ 0.98,
we manually approved the suggested disease matches and assigned names to the new groups. Finally, these groupings were applied to the knowledge graph.
After this process, 22,205 disease concepts in MONDO were collapsed into 17,080 grouped
diseases, which has resulted in a higher average edge density across diseases and more clinically
relevant disease nodes.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q113044292)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q113044292)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q113044292&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
