
Twelve quick tips for software design
=====================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q113308788]  
  
Publication date : 24 of February, 2022  

# Highlights

But this isn’t a license to create a tangled mess: We can and should make it look as though we had a plan so that the next person who has to read our code will be able to understand it (Box 1) [3].

More realistically, a change in one place should only require a small number of changes in a few predictable places.

Software designers achieve this in two ways. Information hiding means putting the data each part of a program needs in one place, and only accessing that data through a small set of functions. Doing this reduces cognitive load by allowing people to focus on one part of the program at a time. Loose coupling means making those parts independent of one another so that they can be combined in many different ways. 

Programmers usually implement these principles by separating interface from implementation. The interface specifies what a piece of software can do; its implementation is how it achieves that, and no other piece of software should be tied to its implementation details

Design by contract is one way to enforce this idea [13]. Any function can be characterized by the preconditions that must be true of its inputs in order for it to run and the postconditions that it guarantees will be true of its output.

. For example, instead of storing the X, Y, and Z coordinates of points separately like this:

def enclose (x0, y0, z0, x1, y1, z1, nearness):

…

we can store each point’s coordinates in an object and write our code like this:

def enclose (p0, p1, nearness):

…

This allows us to think about each point as one “thing”. Where we need the individual coordinates, we can refer to them as p0.X, p0.Y, and so on.


Developer operations (DevOps) has become a buzzword in the last few years. Like “data science” or “computational thinking”, the term is popular because people can use it to mean whatever they want, but the core idea is a good one: managing compilation, packaging, distribution, deployment, and monitoring to make them faster and more reliable [20,21].

Legacy code is software that we’re afraid to try to modify because it’s hard to understand and things will break unexpectedly. 

We can check how well we’ve done this by asking:

How easy is it to create a fixture (i.e., the input that a test runs on)?
How easy is it to invoke just the behavior we want?
How easy is it to check the result?
How easy is it to figure out what “right” is?
How easy is it to delete the feature?

The best balance between abstraction and detail depends on how much people already know. For a novice, too many low-level details obscure the meaning, while too much abstraction makes it impossible to figure out what’s actually going on (Fig 1).
As that person gains experience, they become better able to synthesize meaning from detail and translate generalities into specifics, but their optimum balance also shifts.
Software that is easiest for them to understand may not be optimal for someone else.


However, many programmers do sketch when they’re designing, and these sketches do help them design. These sketches are usually not meant as blueprints: Instead, they help people externalize cognition, i.e., get their thoughts out where they can see them [27,28].

Programmers call this the Principle of Least Privilege: Every component in the system should require as few permissions as possible for as short as possible.

For example, if an application requires users to change their password every few weeks, security fatigue will soon set in and people will choose less and less secure passwords

Making software accessible doesn’t just help people with obvious disabilities: The population is aging, and everything you do to help people who are deaf also helps people who are gradually losing their hearing

Good design makes it easier for people who aren’t already immersed in your project to figure out where and how they can contribute to it [36],





# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q113308788)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q113308788)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q113308788&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/JOURNAL.PCBI.1009809)  
