
Scholia for Software
====================
  
  [@wikidata:Q113992928]  
  
Publication date : 15 of September, 2022  

# Highlights
This project seeks to profile research software to help users form a better understanding of the various relationships between scientific software and the research it supports.

his lack of information causes problems including general inaccessibility of information on critical research tools, lack of credit for software and infrastructure developers, overdependence on under-supported software, lack of appropriate recognition for the tool developers and researchers from underrepresented demographics, and barriers to reproducibility.

What is the work plan or approach being taken?
Through the data we already have in Wikidata from the WikiCite project, we can write queries to identify, for instance, GitHub users who have co-authored scholarly publications (cf. Fig. 1). This is our starting point from which we will seek more data, develop the software, and organize community conversation.

Register research software and tools through dedicated Wikidata items. The mined data about software will be cleaned, integrated, and converted to Wikidata’s data model, subjected to quality checks and then imported into Wikidata

Adapt Scholia profiles for research software and software citation. As a basis for software profiles (see demo for Scholia), we will assemble questions that users could ask about research software. These will be compared with sets of questions that would suit software more generally, for which profiles are already available via WikiDP, albeit without research context (example). Some of these questions may not be readily addressable using present-day Wikidata, as either its relevant data or pertinent data models might be incomplete (see the “Register research software” section above on how this will be addressed). 



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q113992928)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q113992928)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q113992928&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3897/RIO.8.E94771)  
