
How many markers are needed to robustly determine a cell's type?
================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q114760862]  
  
Publication date : 01 of November, 2021  

# Highlights

* Five datasets are needed to obtain reliable markers, particularly for rare populations
• The ideal number of markers per cell type ranges from 50 to 200
• Marker lists generalize across brain regions and reliably identify individual cells
• Ideal markers can be rapidly visualized by plotting AUROC against fold change

We estimate that 10 to 200 meta-analytic markers provide optimal downstream performance and make available replicable marker lists for the 85 BICCN cell types.

Cell-type centroids provide an efficient summary of active gene expression programs (Zeisel et al., 2018), but they are subject to batch effects (Tung et al., 2017) and discard expression variability. 
In this manuscript, we systematically assess the replicability of markers for BICCN cell types.
Although individual meta-markers only imperfectly capture cell types, we find that aggregating 10 to 200 meta-markers leads to optimal performance in downstream computational analyses, such as cell-type annotation and deconvolution. 

We focused on a BICCN neuron atlas containing 7 datasets with 482,712 cells, organized into a hierarchy of 116 cell types in 3 levels of increasing resolution: classes, subclasses, and clusters (Yao et al., 2021a) (Table 1).


The ideal marker gene fulfills two criteria: (1) it is expressed in all cells of the population of interest, providing high coverage; (2) it is not expressed in background cells, providing a high signal-to-noise ratio (Figure 1A ). 

urprisingly, for more than 5 datasets, our results suggest that thresholding becomes unnecessary: a gene that was detected as upregulated in 5 independent datasets was almost always upregulated in the 2 remaining datasets, even at low effect size (FC∼1)

No individual marker offers high coverage and signal-to-noise ratio

As expected, the Pareto fronts associated with glutamatergic and GABAergic cells contain perfect markers (Figure 1F) that identify these populations with high confidence across all technologies sampled, such as Gad1 for GABAergic cells and Neurod2 for glutamatergic cells. In contrast, there is no perfect marker for nonneuronal cells: their Pareto front only includes highly sensitive markers such as Qk (highly expressed in nonneurons but also expressed in neurons) and highly specific markers such as the Slco1c1 transporter (high signal-to-noise, but not covering all nonneurons),

In particular, we ask how many markers contribute to make cell types more unique and how the selection of replicable markers improves cell-type characterization.

Automatic annotation of cell types typically involves two steps: (1) prioritize cells that are most likely to belong to a given cell type; (2) annotate cells that exceed a prespecified threshold condition. 

After this change, plateaus of optimal thresholds aligned across all datasets (Figure 4D), suggesting that marker lists have preserved relative contributions in all datasets. 

One of the primary purposes to which cell atlas data may eventually be put is deconvolution of bulk data where cell composition is likely related to the condition of interest (e.g., disease).

To understand how easily meta-markers generalize, we used a straightforward annotation method: assign cells to the cell type with the highest average meta-marker expression. For simplicity, we considered the same number of meta-markers for all cell types: 100 at the class and subclass level, 50 at the cluster level.

This trend became particularly obvious for cells with marker enrichment >2 (Figure S9D), where all unseen cell types became “unassigned,” while conserving high matching scores between shared cell types.

For cell-type annotation, we used a simple classification scheme based on thresholding averaged marker expression, which can be seen as a baseline that can be easily and rapidly applied without specialized machine learning knowledge.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q114760862)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q114760862)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q114760862&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ISCI.2021.103292)  
