
Biolink Model: A universal schema for knowledge graphs in clinical, biomedical, and translational science
=========================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q114829002]  
  
Publication date : 06 of June, 2022  

# Highlights

The core of the model is a set of hierarchical, interconnected classes (or categories) and relationships between them (or predicates) representing biomedical entities such as gene, disease, chemical, anatomic structure, and phenotype

We demonstrate the utility of Biolink Model in various initiatives, including the Biomedical Data Translator Consortium and the Monarch Initiative, and show how it has supported easier integration and interoperability of biomedical KGs, bringing together knowledge from multiple sources and helping to realize the goals of translational science.

Within the biomedical sciences, examples include SemMedDB,4 Hetionet,5 Implicitome,6 Monarch Initiative,7 the biological subset of Wikidata,8 SPOKE,9 and KG-COVID-19.10

The Wikidata Ontology18 is used by Wikidata for representing knowledge. In terms of schemas, schema.org is used for representing metadata about entities and relationships to other entities. BioSchemas is an extension of schema.org for representing metadata about biological entities.


An example of an Association represented in Biolink Model. In (a), the green ovals represent the subject and object classes, connected by a predicate. Together, the classes and the predicate constitute a statement or “core triple” in the model. Edge properties provide further context and qualification to the core triple. The entire diagram, including the core triple and its provenance, represents a Biolink Model “association.” In (b), we see a specific example of a “biolink:DiseaseToPhenotypicFeatureAssociation,” where the subject is “biolink:Disease,” the object is “biolink:PhenotypicFeature,” and the predicate is “biolink:has_phenotype.” In addition, the “biolink:publications” property (lavender oval) records the provenance of the core triple.


Ontology-oriented KGs are also amenable to machine learning approaches, such as embedding in vector space,14 which supports the application of deep neural networks for tasks such as link prediction and node classification. Within the biomedical sciences, ontology-oriented KGs have been used for tasks, such as drug repurposing,5 target prioritization,15 and phenotype profile matching.


Tools such as the Biomedical Data Translator Node Normalization Service and the Knowledge Graph Exchange Framework use the identifier mappings in Biolink Model to return the preferred equivalent identifier when presented with several identifiers that represent the same domain concept but with different namespaces (e.g., NCBIGene vs. HGNC gene identifiers).

The success of Biolink Model can be attributed to its community—biologists, clinicians, data curators, developers, subject matter experts, and ontologists—all of whom have contributed their requirements, perspectives, and expertise to help build a flexible semantic data model. Biolink Model is under continual development, with frequent releases and a publicly accessible issue tracker on GitHub.


Most importantly, Biolink Model supports the harmonization of KGs and underlying data sources in a manner that adheres to FAIR principles26 and facilitates applications across a broad spectrum of biomedical use cases, thereby democratizing and accelerating translational science.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q114829002)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q114829002)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q114829002&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/CTS.13302)  
