
Cell Taxonomy: a curated repository of cell types with multifaceted characterization
====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q114412350]  
  
Publication date : 26 of September, 2022  

# Highlights  

Here, we present Cell Taxonomy (https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/celltaxonomy), a comprehensive and curated repository of cell types and associated cell markers encompassing a wide range of species, tissues and conditions. Combined with literature curation and data integration, the current version of Cell Taxonomy establishes a well-structured taxonomy for 3,143 cell types and houses a comprehensive collection of 26,613 associated cell markers in 257 conditions and 387 tissues across 34 species. 

Based on 4,299 publications and single-cell transcriptomic profiles of ∼3.5 million cells, Cell Taxonomy features multifaceted characterization for cell types and cell markers, involving quality assessment of cell markers and cell clusters, cross-species comparison, cell composition of tissues and cellular similarity based on markers.

In the past several years, valuable efforts have been made to establish databases for cell types and/or cell markers (8–14). Among them, representative databases are Cell Ontology (8), CellFinder (14), CellMarker (9), SHOGoiN (10) and PanglaoDB (11). Specifically, Cell Ontology, a widely used ontology for the representation of cell types, provides hierarchical relationships for approximately 2,600 cell types (8). CellFinder characterizes 3,394 mammalian cell types and contains ∼200 microarray and bulk RNA-seq profiles (14).

Considering that one cell type may have multiple cell markers, CellMarker constructs a curated compendium of 15,778 cell markers for 1,702 cell types in human and 11,388 cell makers for 1,421 cell types in mouse (9).

Similarly, SHOGoiN integrates diverse human cell information including 23,000 entries of 355 cell types and 5,630 cell markers along with 7,161 single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) profiles (10). In addition, PanglaoDB collects 178 cell types and 4,681 markers as well as scRNA-seq data for human and mouse (11).

However, these existing databases, albeit widely used, have several limitations. First, most of cell types in Cell Ontology are not associated with available cell markers, whereas CellMarker, SHOGoiN and PanglaoDB contain limited cell types. Second, Cell Ontology, CellFinder and CellMarker do not provide single-cell transcriptome evaluation for cell markers.

Third, existing databases cover limited species and none of them enable comparison of cell types across species. Last but not least, multiple evidence-based assessment for cell markers and cell clusters is not adequate in these databases, thus presenting substantial challenges in cell type delineation.

Cell Taxonomy houses a comprehensive collection of 3,143 cell types and 26,613 associated cell markers in 257 conditions and 387 tissues across 34 species.

. Thus, each cell type in Cell Taxonomy is assigned with a unique taxonomy ID and associated with an abundance of relevant information based on a curation model (https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/celltaxonomy/help#curation_model/). As a result, the current version of Cell Taxonomy presents a comprehensive and well-structured taxonomy for 3,143 cell types, and 82.8% (2,601) are annotated with available cell markers, giving rise to a total of 226,222 entries collected from 4,299 publications.

Importantly, 438 cell types previously uncharacterized in other databases are curated from 1,555 publications with available cell markers. And 397 cell types currently undescribed in Cell Ontology are incorporated into an expanded cell topology tree with standardized Cell Taxonomy IDs and descriptive terms, expanding the compendium of Cell Ontology by 15.3%. Collectively, a standardized taxonomy for curated cell types is of fundamental significance for characterizing cell types and disentangling cellular heterogeneity.




# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q114412350)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q114412350)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q114412350&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/NAR/GKAC816)  
