
Recommendations for interoperability among infrastructures
==========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q114668412]  
  
Publication date : 14 of October, 2022  

# Highlights
The BiCIKL project is born from a vision that biodiversity data are most useful if they are presented as a network of data that can be integrated and viewed from different starting points. BiCIKL’s goal is to realise that vision by linking biodiversity data infrastructures, particularly for literature, molecular sequences, specimens, nomenclature and analytics. 

ith all these pressures it is perhaps difficult to step back and evaluate where investment is needed and what the future opportunities are. This is one of the reasons that a hackathon was chosen as a mechanism to examine the interoperability of infrastructures 


Undoubtedly, the pandemic has presented a challenge to collaborative working, and particularly a hackathon that pre-pandemic was defined by the radial collocation of its participants (Pe-Than and Herbsleb 2019). Collocation enables participants to escape daily distractions and interruptions, focus on a single problem, but also exchange knowledge. Hackathons can expand someone's knowledge such that they can effectively plant the seeds of future innovation.

Hackathons can take a number of formats, but to describe ours we have applied the taxonomy of hackathons proposed by Kollwitz and Dinter (2019) (Fig. 2)

Everyone from the BiCIKL community was encouraged to submit topics for pilot projects to test interoperability between the infrastructures. The topics were retrospectively grouped into three themes

research-based questions,
evaluating the infrastructures’ modalities of access, and the use and implementation of standards, and
testing technologies and workflows to improve linkage of different data types.
Below, we outline these topics and use them to support five high-level recommendations for infrastructures to improve their interoperability.

1. Use of data brokers


Wikidata is a collaboratively edited multilingual database hosted by the Wikimedia foundation (Vrandečić 2012), which can be used for this kind of data brokerage. Wikidata can be enriched in biodiversity data by the domain specific infrastructures, the community, but also other data brokers or knowledge graphs such as OpenBiodiv (topic 7, Suppl. material 7)

In the hackathon, Wikidata was also used as a data broker for taxa. Topic 12 (Suppl. material 12) used Wikidata as a bridge between GBIF and ENA for taxon IDs (based on NCBI taxonomy) and taxon names, because they use different taxonomic backbones that are joined within Wikidata. All these examples show that data brokers have a crucial role providing links between identifiers systems, creating links where there is no other source, and providing links that can be curated by the community.


It is also worth noting that some infrastructures, such as Wikidata, actually give agency to their users to add data, make corrections and resolve their own problems with the infrastructure.

International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (ICN). The ICN has recommendations for how to write the name of a hybrid, though the equivalent Code for zoology does not even make recommendations. The ICN’s recommendations are not rules and are frequently not followed, as we discovered during the hackathon. Theremore, the ICN gives a lot of latitude to users for interpretation. When standards get used with real data, users discover their limitations and there has to be means for standards to accept feedback and evolve.







# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q114668412)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q114668412)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q114668412&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3897/RIO.8.E96180)  
