
Integrating and formatting biomedical data as pre-calculated knowledge graph embeddings in the Bioteque
==========
  
  [@wikidata:Q114094550]  
  

# Highlights

 Here we present the Bioteque, a resource of unprecedented size and scope that contains pre-calculated biomedical descriptors derived from a gigantic knowledge graph, displaying more than 450 thousand biological entities and 30 million relationships between them. 
 The Bioteque integrates, harmonizes, and formats data collected from over 150 data sources, including 12 biological entities (e.g., genes, diseases, drugs) linked by 67 types of associations (e.g., ‘drug treats disease’, ‘gene interacts with gene’). 

<!-- Interesting narrative.     - 1.3.5. Integrative bioknowledge graphs parallel to Wikidata -->


 As a result, even though as many as 1641 resources were listed in the 2021 Online Molecular Biology Database Collection4, only a small portion are broadly used, and hundreds remain isolated with their own particular formats

 
Himmelstein et al. suggested the use of knowledge graphs (KG) as a tool to integrate heterogeneous biomolecular data

In a biomedical KG, nodes represent biological or chemical entities (e.g., genes, cell lines, diseases, drugs, etc.), and edges capture the interactions or relationships between them (e.g., ‘drug treats disease’ or ‘cell upregulates gene’). This concept has recently been expanded to include clinical entities13.

To make biomedical knowledge embeddings available to the broad scientific community, we have developed the Bioteque, a resource of unprecedented size and scope that contains pre-calculated embeddings derived from a gigantic heterogeneous network (more than 450k nodes and 30M edges).

Finally, we offer an online resource to facilitate access and exploration of the pre-calculated embeddings (https://bioteque.irbbarcelona.org).

In the Bioteque, we defined 67 types of associations reflecting biological relationships between them. An example of such an association would be a gene that is associated with a given pathway (GEN-ass-PWY) and might be downregulated in a certain cell (GEN-dwr-CLL) or tissue type (GEN-dwr-TIS), or a drug compound that is used to treat a disease (CPD-trt-DIS). 

We thus explored whether our more succinct 128-dimensional vectors were able to retain the information contained within the full GEx profile

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q114094550)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q114094550)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q114094550&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
