
The disambiguation of people names in biological collections
============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q114570605]  
  
Publication date : 10 of October, 2022  

# Highlights

Scientific collections have been built by people. For hundreds of years, people have collected, studied, identified, preserved, documented and curated collection specimens. Understanding who those people are is of interest to historians, but much more can be made of these data by other stakeholders once they have been linked to the people’s identities and their biographies.

Biographical information about individuals can be used to validate scientific data associated with their work and that of their collaborators.

Unambiguously identifying people also makes it easier to quantify their contributions, particularly for those, such as taxonomists, for whom citation indices are not necessarily a useful indicator of output, nor quality (Valdecasas 2011). Furthermore, broadening the evaluation of scientific contributions may help increase the diversity and inclusivity of career evaluations (Bhalla 2019, Woolston 2022).


Clarifying the "who" for specimens extends the number of records useful for research by linking them together; it aids data analysis by helping identify duplicate specimens collected by the one person; it helps resolve past and present collector networks (Groom et al. 2014, Meeus et al. 2021);


This does not mean they have to share any personal information, but registering and using an Open Researcher and Contributor ID (ORCID) is a simple step each researcher should take to preserve their own scientific legacy and the legacy of the institution that employs them. Disambiguating one's own identify also avoids generating disambiguation work in the future (Groom et al. 2020).

However, even in the absence of legal constraints, we have a moral obligation to be sensitive and conscientious when handling personal data


The Anglo-Saxon traditional sequence of title, first name, middle name/s, family name/s, suffix is only one of many ways in which names are constructed (see case studies for examples).

Examples of labels from herbarium specimens where the female collector has gone unrecognised.

Wikidata
Wikidata has revolutionised our ability to disambiguate people: it contains only public domain data; it can be edited by anyone; and it is readable by both people and machines. 

Wikidata provides a globally unique and resolvable URL identifer by assigning a "Q identifier" for each person (e.g. the phycologist Josephine Tilden Q20856036).

Wikidata, like Wikipedia, has the advantage of being community-edited. It is a centralised resource and ensures that data on contributors to collections are openly linked and can be easily enriched and corrected. 

The notability criteria for the creation of a Wikidata item are significantly lower than that for the creation of a Wikipedia article (see case study below on Winifred Chase); a person is notable for Wikidata if they "can be described using serious and publicly available references" (https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:Notability). Wikidata is also a multilingual project allowing editors to contribute in their preferred language.


Bionomia is an online, open data curation tool for the disambiguation of collectors and determiners of specimens (Shorthouse 2020).

Other biodiversity informatics platforms facilitate this process by providing biographical data and other information that support disambiguation.

As of July 2022, 1,825 participants have either claimed or attributed 22M occurrence records to either an ORCID or a Wikidata Q Identifier, thus persistently linking them to a uniquely identified individual. 

Figure 6.
Two examples of labels where either the determiners (A) or collectors (B) have been unambiguously identified by their ORCID, encoded into QR codes (A) or data matrices (B) on the label.

TL-2 is a guide to the literature of systematic botany published between 1753 and 1940 and was originally a print series in fifteen volumes published by the International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT). A digital version of TL-2 has been made available online by the Smithsonian Institution Libraries. It contains detailed biographies of taxonomists, including their publications, their employment history and the institutions where their specimens have been deposited. It is an invaluable source of information about people publishing in a specific field within a specific time period.



Collaborative disambiguation of North American bats
In a project to enhance currently published data for the rhinolophid and hipposiderid bats, some authors of this paper held a workshop with bat researchers and collection managers on 1 December 2020 (Mast et al. 2021).

Despite Dr. Swales' contributions to the field, both as a botanist and herbarium curator, the lack of a significant or unified digital presence made piecing together the story of her botanical collections and collaborations difficult. 

The disambiguation process first required the creation of a Wikidata profile and Q number and then the creation of a digital profile on Bionomia. Dr. Swales has now been unambiguously linked to specimens (either as collector or determiner) across 15 organisations.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q114570605)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q114570605)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q114570605&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3897/BDJ.10.E86089)  
 * [Full text URL](https://bdj.pensoft.net/article/86089/)  
