
Cross-species single-cell transcriptomic analysis reveals divergence of cell composition 
and functions in mammalian ileum epithelium
==========
  
  [@wikidata:Q114143026]  
  

# Highlights
Here, cross-species analysis of single-cell transcriptomic
atlas of the ileum epithelium from mouse, rat, pig, macaque and human reveals the conserved and diferential cell
types and functions among species, identifes a new CA7+ cell type in pig, macaque and human ileum

CA7 cells

, we analyzed the conserved and diferential cell types and functions
among species, identifed a new CA7+ cell subtype in pig,
macaque and human ileum, and defned the conserved
and species-specifc intestinal stem cell signature genes.

e cell types were identifed,
including enterocytes (VIL1, FABP2), transient-amplifying (TA) cells (MKI67, STMN1), goblet cells (CLCA1,
AGR2), goblet progenitor cells (co-expression of goblet
and TA cell markers), stem cells (LGR5, SMOC2), enteroendorcine cells (EECs) (CHGA, CHGB), Paneth cells
(LYZ, MMP7) and tuft cells (DCLK1, POU2F3)

Te function of steroid esterifcation was enriched in mouse ileum (C7). Te
stronger immune response in pig ileum was supported
by previous observations that gut microbiota in pig was
more abundant compared to human, mouse and rat
(Kobayashi et al., 2020; Xiang et al., 2020).

Two brush border-specifc protocadherins CDHR2 and CDHR5 were ubiquitously expressed in all species, which were essential for villus formation and enterocyte function (Crawley et al., 2014; Pinette et al., 2019).

Molecular characterization of CA7+ cells across species
Our clustering analysis revealed a new cell type which
highly expressed CA7, OTOP2, NOTCH2, SPIB and GUCA2B (Fig.  5A).

Gene ontology enrichment analysis highlighted the
functions of CA7+ cells in regulation of ion transport,
body fuid levels, complement activation and small
GTPase mediated signal transduction (Fig.  5D).


We identifed unreported CA7+ cells in pig,
macaque and human ileum and distinguished the distinct
gene expressions of EECs and Paneth cells. In addition,
conserved and species-specifc ISCs signature genes were
defned across fve species. Importantly, we elucidated
the diference on drug transport and metabolism among
fve species and established t

To identify signature genes of each cell types, functions
“FindAllMarkers” and “FindMarkers” in Seurat were
used. T



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q114143026)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q114143026)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q114143026&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
