
The encoding of touch by somatotopically aligned dorsal column subdivisions
===========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q115683384]  
  
Publication date : 23 of November, 2022  

# Highlights

 Most sensory information is conveyed from the DCN to the somatosensory cortex through a prominent projection to the somatosensory ventral posterolateral thalamus (VPL) for the conscious perception of touch. A separate, lesser-known population of DCN neurons relay tactile information to the external cortex of the inferior colliculus (IC)12,13. In this brain region, the information is integrated and contextualized with auditory information. Other populations of DCN neurons project to the olivocerebellar system14,15 to coordinate motor adaptation. DCN neurons can also project to secondary thalamic nuclei16 involved in the affective state and to the spinal cord and periaqueductal grey14,16. Thus, the DCN is a conduit of incoming mechanosensory signals and broadly connect mechanoreceptors in the periphery to several major brain areas17.


Different DCN neuron types encoded distinct aspects of mechanosensory stimuli suited to their projection targets. VPL projection neurons (VPL-PNs) are the most abundant cell type in the DCN, outnumbering IC projection neurons (IC-PNs) and local inhibitory interneurons (VGAT-INs) with an estimated proportion of VPL-PN:IC-PN:VGAT-IN of 2:1:1 (ref. 13

PSDC neurons constitute up to 40% of the axons ascending the dorsal column6 (Extended Data Fig. 3), but the function of PSDC neurons and their contribution to somatosensory representations in the DCN and higher brain regions have remained unclear since their discovery

Among the sensory neurons that express Calca are A-fibre HTMRs, C-fibre HTMRs, thermoreceptors and polymodal C-fibre neurons

 The development of this somatotopy probably requires complex coordination between primary sensory neurons, including both LTMRs and HTMRs, spinal cord dorsal horn circuitry and the DCN. Developmental activity, either spontaneous or mechanically evoked, may play an essential part in organizing this system, as it does in other sensory systems44,45. Moreover, adult PSDC neurons exhibit strong receptive field plasticity46,47, which raises the possibility that signal propagation through the indirect dorsal column pathway can be modified by sensory experience.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q115683384)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q115683384)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q115683384&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-022-05470-X)  
