
Recommendations for use of annotations and persistent identifiers in taxonomy and biodiversity publishing
=========================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q115249601]  
  
Publication date : 16 of November, 2022  

# Highlights

 The paper proposes best practices on how identifiers should be used in the different cases and on how they can be minted, cited, and expressed in the backend article XML to facilitate conversion to and further re-use of the article content as FAIR data. The paper also discusses several specific routes for post-publication re-use of semantically enhanced content through large biodiversity data aggregators such as the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF)


 Taxonomic publications communicate the discovery of new biological taxa or new data on already known taxa in the form of taxonomic treatments, well delimited sections of text for each taxon (Fig. 1; Catapano 2010, Penev et al. 2011, Agosti and Egloff 2009, Agosti and Egloff 2021). New research results are added to the already existing treatments by citing previous treatments using a “treatment citation”.


Treatments begin with a nomenclature section including a unique identifier for the taxonomic name, the Latin Binomen for species or Latin Name for a supraspecific taxon such as genus, family or order. This is followed by one or more sections covering the citation of previous treatments of the same taxon, description, diagnosis, etymology, distribution, material citations or conservation. New taxa are based on type and other specimens in natural history collections and data on these specimens are included in the treatment in the form of dedicated “material citations”. 
This new style of presenting information on biological taxa required a certain degree of comprehension and adoption but was widely accepted by the taxonomists in the second half of 18th century.

Research results presented in the biodiversity literature are one of the best curated data (Deans et al. 2012) providing expert linking of taxonomic names, molecular, including omics data, phenomics data, specimens, geographical, environmental and climatic data, taxonomies and phylogenies, previously published data, publications and people via accession codes, material citations, treatment citations, bibliographic references or personal identifiers, respectively. The semantic annotation or semantic role labelling (e.g. Walls et al. (2014)) of texts, provides an additional feature for identifying the role of people and taxonomic names.

Modern taxonomic articles follow a rather strict structure that facilitates their representation in a structured XML format following the widely used TaxPub*4 schema and enabling efficient data exchange (Catapano 2010, Penev et al. 2012). Based on the Journal Article Tag Set (JATS) standard*5, a journal article is composed of up to three optional parts, which should appear in the following order: Front matter is required while body and back are optional all in that order.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q115249601)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q115249601)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q115249601&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3897/RIO.8.E97374)  
