
Crossref as a source of open bibliographic metadata
===================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q116694760]  
  
Publication date : 07 of July, 2022  

# Highlights

This metadata is then made
openly available by Crossref. By making large amounts of bibliographic metadata
openly available, Crossref is becoming an increasingly interesting data source for
bibliometric analyses (Hendricks et al., 2020).

We recognize the importance of other sources of open bibliographic metadata, such
as PubMed, OpenCitations (Peroni & Shotton, 2020), and OpenAlex (Priem et al.,
2022). Many of these sources obtain their data at least partly from Crossref. Given the
critical role of Crossref in the landscape of open bibliographic metadata, our focus in
this paper is exclusively on Crossref.

The percentage of journal articles for which author affiliations are available has
increased from 13% in 2000 to 24% in 2021. Affiliations are reported in unstructured
strings, so they do not have a standardized format. Since 2021, affiliations can also be
reported in a standardized way using Research Organization Registry identifiers
(Gould, 2020; Hendricks et al., 2021b). Because this is a very recent development, we
do not consider it in more detail in this paper


We use Crossref’s XML Metadata Plus Snapshot. The snapshot was downloaded
on February 3, 2022. We consider all 119.0 million records classified as journal article,
book chapter, conference paper, or preprint

Most of the larger publishers support the Initiative for Open Citations. As a result,
in early 2021 a tipping point was reached when the threshold of one billion open
citations was crossed (Hutchins, 2021). 

Wiley is among the leading publishers in terms of the availability of ORCIDs,
author affiliations, and license information in Crossref, but it has not made any abstracts
openly available. We hope that the statistics presented in this paper will help publishers
to move toward full openness of bibliographic metadata.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q116694760)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q116694760)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q116694760&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.31222/OSF.IO/SMXE5)  
