
The Ontology of Biological Attributes (OBA) - Computational Traits for the Life Sciences
========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q116516353]  
  
Publication date : 27 of January, 2023  

# Highlights

The Ontology of Biological Attributes (OBA) is a formalised, species-independent collection of interoperable phenotypic trait categories that is intended to fulfil a data integration role.


A is a standardised representational framework for observable attributes that are characteristics of biological entities, organisms, or parts of organisms. OBA has a modular design which provides several benefits for users and data integrators, including an automated and meaningful classification of trait terms computed on the basis of logical inferences drawn from domain-specific ontologies for cells, anatomical and other relevant entities. The logical axioms in OBA also provide a previously missing bridge that can computationally link Mendelian phenotypes with GWAS and quantitative traits. 

 Currently there are more than 800 biological
databases collecting genotype, phenotype, and variation data from a wide range of
organisms8
. The valuable knowledge in these databases on variants, phenotypes and gene
function is highly relevant to human and veterinary medicine, agriculture, evolutionary
biology, ecology, and comparative genomics in general.

For example, the Mammalian Phenotype Ontology
(MP)17 and the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO)18 have different taxonomic focuses to
categorise phenotypes of primarily Mendelian-type inheritance

The majority of attributes in OBA are logically defined using the Web Ontology Language
(OWL). These logical definitions use terms from relevant reference ontologies, such as
Uberon24 or ChEBI25

In this paper, we introduce OBA, an ontology and logical framework for representing
biological attributes.

t is fully aligned with the Core Ontology for Biology and Biomedicine (COB28) because
all concepts in OBA are, implicitly, children of "characteristic" (PATO:0000001), which itself is
part of COB. However, we currently do not import COB directly (though this is planned as
future work).

Figure 1: The Entity-Quality model enables composing biological attributes in a way that is compatible with the
logical definitions of widely used ontologies such as the MP and HPO which are used to document phenotypes
associated with diseases or genes.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q116516353)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q116516353)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q116516353&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.26.525742)  
