
Cell types as species: Exploring a metaphor
===============================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q116909629]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2023  

# Highlights

These parallels begin with philosophy, with discussion of both cell types and species as being either individuals, groups, or something in between (e.g., homeostatic property clusters).

“Who … has not felt the agonizing mental tension engendered by the difficulty of finding adequate verbal expression for something which has seemed to be tolerably clear in thought? And who, in such a predicament, has not eagerly welcomed the timely arrival of a suggestive metaphor … ? Such indeed is the relief, that the mind is lulled into complacency and no longer feels the urge to undertake the laborious analysis which is necessary if the makeshift metaphor is to be replaced by a direct statement in genuinely biological terms.”

J.H. Woodger. On biological transformations. W.E. Le Gros Clark, P.B. Medewar (Eds.), Essays on growth and form presented to D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson, Clarendon Press, Oxford (1945), pp. 95–120

<!-- Very nice citation -->

The problem of defining “cell type” and of classifying cell types within and among organisms has been compared to the even older problem of defining “species,” philosophical elements of which can be traced to Aristotle (Ereshefsky, 2007; Shanker et al., 2017).


For example, the section of the paper by Zeng and Sanes (2017) on “Neuronal Cell Types as Species” begins:

In thinking about how to address the complexity of neuronal types, it may be useful to consult a field that groups individuals into types as its main preoccupation. In the field known as taxonomy, systematics or cladistics, the smallest discrete unit is the species. Although debates continue about how to define species and even whether they exist, systematics has nonetheless been a successful enterprise. The problems of defining species and neuronal cell types are similar in many ways (Tyner, 1975; Rowe and Stone, 1977; Rodieck and Brening, 1983), suggesting that there may be lessons to learn from the systematists.

Both fields therefore face issues ranging from the philosophical (Do species or cell types exist, and if so what is their nature?) to the practical (What criteria should be used to recognize and classify species or cell types?). Both fields increasingly analyze individuals—organisms or cells—as their primary source of data.


There is an additional parallel. Although there are systematists and cell biologists who subscribe to the nominalist position that species or cell types are nothing more than human constructs imposed arbitrarily on continuous natural variation, both categories play useful—many would say indispensable—roles in their respective fields (e.g., Garnett and Christidis, 2017; Cembrowski and Menon, 2018; Patiño et al., 2022). As one contributor to a recent compilation of cell type definitions (Clevers et al., 2017; Allon Klein) noted, “The concept of ‘cell type’ is poorly defined and incredibly useful.” Consequently, empirical practitioners in both fields, needing to interpret ever more sophisticated and voluminous datasets, press forward, defining these terms as needed for their purposes, informed to varying degrees by theoretical and philosophical debates, and guided in practice by field-wide standards enforced by reviewers, editors, and grant panels.


To understand why this should be true—a major question in plant cell biology (Roeder et al., 2021)—requires a definition of “cell type.” It was shocking to learn that there is no single definition and that cell biologists are dealing with their own “species problem.” As a practicing systematist with a longstanding interest in the issue of how molecular variation relates to species relationships (Doyle, 1992, 1997, 2021), it was apparent that the “cell types as species” metaphor had not been updated to include many developments in the ongoing species debate, particularly those involving molecular phylogenomics.

<!-- Very interesting perspective -->

There is, however, a view that species are metaphysically neither individuals nor groups, but have some elements of both, and that they are best treated as Homeostatic Property Clusters (HPCs); HPCs are marked by a set of characteristics, all of which need not be shared by all members, whose statistical correlation is due to an underlying homeostatic mechanism (Shanker et al., 2017; Casetta and Vecchi, 2021). Casetta and Vecchi (2021) pointed out that even Hull, in his 1976 “species as individuals” paper, wondered if the distinction between individuals and kinds was too crude; they noted that the cluster character criterion of HPCs avoids the problem that all members of a group defined by its essential characters must possess all of those characters, and pointed to genetic coherence as the homeostatic mechanism underlying the correlation of clustered characters. Thus, the philosophical debate continues, and yet another alternative was suggested by Shanker et al. (2017), who recommended a fuzzy set theory approach to defining species, in which different populations have varying probabilities of belonging to one or more groups.


Recently, Xia and Yanai (2019) and Moroz (2021) independently analogized cell types with chemical elements in the periodic table—the primary example of essentialist categories cited by Ghiselin (1974) and Hull (1976). Slater (2013), in discussing the philosophy underlying the definition of cell types, argued that essentialist definitions of cell type fail to meet three key criteria: that the defining properties be intrinsic; that all members and only members of the type possess those properties; and that the “essence” explain why all members also possess additional qualities in common. However, he also argued that cells comprising a cell type lack the spatiotemporal relationship to one another that is the major justification for viewing species as individuals (Slater, 2013). Instead, Slater (2013) argued that cell types are described best by a variant of the HPC concept, because they have metaphysical features of both individuals and kinds. In another parallel with species, Battaglia et al. (2013) suggested, in a paper that does not discuss philosophical issues, that cell types are treated best as fuzzy sets, in which individual cells have a probability of belonging to any of several well-defined archetypes. This seems consistent with the observation that “at the most fundamental level, single-cell dynamics is probabilistic” (Teschendorff and Feinberg, 2021); fuzzy clustering is also mentioned by Yuste et al. (2020).

<!-- YES! This is very relevant, and very clear arguments. Congratulations.  -->

“The ideal species concept—and why we can’t get it,” “Applicability and theoretical significance tend to be in opposition to each other. The more theoretically significant a concept is, the more difficult it is to apply.” A solution to this problem decoupled theory from practice, adopting the stance that although there are many competing definitions of species, and thus many criteria for recognizing them, there might be a primary underlying species concept (de Queiroz, 1998, 2007). What, exactly, that concept is remains debatable, but there is widespread agreement that it is based on genetic lineage, s


 third school of systematics, known as typological, taxonomic or phenetic systematics, which groups individuals into species according to their similarity of genotype and/or phenotype.” They dismissed the first as inapplicable, and after noting several problems with a lineage-based approach for cells, adopted a transcriptomic similarity approach as being most useful for their primary purpose, classifying cell types for cell atlases (e.g., Callaway et al., 2021). Accordingly, they defined a neuronal cell type as “a population of neurons with properties that are homogeneous within the population but differ from those of other neurons.” This operational definition is both provisional and explicitly pluralistic (Zeng and Sanes, 2017); for example, Yao et al. (2021) referred to “transcriptomic cell types” as only one of various ways that cells could be classified.

 <!-- I don't love the term "population", but it is okay. Note that their definition is plainly the defition of a "class" in formal ontologies. It is very general, and lumps states, types and other different divisions into a single level. I like that.  -->

 In other words, although they are certainly interested in evolution, their approach prioritized pattern over evolutionary process. For their part, Arendt et al. (2019) rejected the Zeng and Sanes (2017) definition even as an operational one, because they believed that although such approaches “can provide useful classifications for neuron types within one organism, they are problematic for comparing across species. In particular, phenotypic definitions fail to distinguish two key types of evolutionary changes: the phenotypic alteration of the same cell type existing in two compared species and the origination of entirely new cell types”—precisely the process-oriented questions of greatest interest to these authors. Instead, they proposed their own operational definition, discussed below under the heading of “Phenetics and cladistics.”

 <!-- Different definitions for different uses.  -->
 The tension between interest in pattern vs. process, emphasizing diagnosis and theory, respectively, exists for both species and cell types. Might wider recognition of this tension by cell biologists bring these two approaches into harmony as has been done at least to some degree in systematics? As with species, different attributes of cells can be distinguished—morphology, physiology, gene expression—and it has long been known that these can be discordant (Tyner, 1975; Vickaryous and Hall, 2006). Other species concepts and criteria beyond the few cited by Zeng and Sanes (2017; Table 1) may be useful to consider. Could the insight that the order in which different attributes arise varies in the evolution of different species be applied to the order in which transcriptomes and other phenotypes appear during the development of different cell types (Figure 2)? 
 
 
 Is there perhaps a single underlying theoretical basis for recognizing cell type, comparable to the role genetic lineage plays for many species concepts?

<!-- This is a very relevant consideration. I don't think many people have explicitly asked themselves that.  -->

Just as individual organisms trace their ultimate origin to the common ancestor of all life, cells of an individual multicellular organism belong to a common historical lineage, beginning with the single cell of the zygote.

. Rodieck and Brening (1983) suggested that “It might appear that the lineage of ganglion-cell types, expressed during development, would provide a causal agent as useful as the role genealogy plays in the classification of species.” However, they noted that despite the strong superficial resemblance between lineage trees of cells and organismal phylogenies, there are fundamental differences (Rodieck and Brening, 1983).


s. For example, in blood development (hematopoiesis), different cell lineages can produce functionally similar cells (Yáñez et al., 2022). Nevertheless, transcriptomic state cannot be assumed to be more important than lineage; in hematopoiesis, Weinreb et al. (2020) found that “sister cells tended to be far more similar in their fate choice than pairs of cells with similar transcriptomes” and concluded that chromatin structure might provide information that neither lineage nor transcriptome reveal.


An appreciation of copy number variation in multicellular eukaryotes has led to the adoption of the pangenome concept from bacterial genomics; it is now recognized that no single individual plant or animal genome provides a complete picture of gene content in its species (e.g., Gao et al., 2019; Miga and Wang, 2021).

Like conspecific individuals, cells of the same type are not identical (Cembrowski and Menon, 2018; Usaj et al., 2021).

 Nevertheless, because it is a snapshot involving multiple cells, Weinreb and Klein (2020) noted that single cell transcriptomic approaches alone cannot determine, for any particular cell, when “progenitor cells become committed to one or more fates or how many distinct paths might lead cells to the same end states.”

 Tasic (2018) noted that whereas the cellular equivalents of phyla, such as the “cardinal classes” of neurons described by Fishell and Kepecs (2020), might be readily identifiable, the same is not true of lower hierarchical levels that correspond to genera or species. 

 But most cell biologists see a real distinction between cell types, which are “hard-wired,” and cell states, which are “soft-wired” (Arendt et al., 2016, 2019; Morris, 2019). However, the distinction between hard- and soft-wired can vary over the course of a cell’s developmental trajectory (Fishell and Kepecs, 2020). Cembrowski and Menon (2018) and Tasic (2018) have suggested that cell states are reversible, whereas cell types are not, at least under standard conditions.

In the analogy of cell types with elements in the periodic table, cell states are like isotopes (Xia and Yanai, 2019; Moroz, 2021).

Alternatively, extrapolating from Tasic’s (2018) comparison with taxonomic categories, if cell types are analogous to species, then cell states might be analogous to subspecies or varieties. A different approach adopted from systematics would consider cell states as semaphorants—different manifestations of the same biological entity, united by some core features but bearing a unique set of characters depending on their stage of development and physiology. But this approach requires that the entity to which semaphorants belong—species or cell types—first be defined.

<!-- Very interesting framework. I had no contact with the "semaphorant" terminology previously. -->

A number of cell biologists have recognized the parallels between the issue of how broadly a cell type or a species should be defined, referring explicitly to “lumpers and splitters” (Rodieck and Brening, 1983; Armañanzas and Ascoli, 2015; Tasic, 2018; Yuste et al., 2020). Decisions about how many species to recognize are often guided by the kinds of variation available to the taxonomist, particularly whether the characters that distinguish taxa are easily discernible.

 But the questions troubling cell biologists about state vs. type seem more tractable than those involving species because there is more hope that a shared set of fundamental rules exist to be discovered. Will such rules reinforce the legitimacy of “cell type” as a theoretical concept as well as a practical category? Regardless of that answer, what characters could be used to define cell types?


Phenetics and cladistics
Species
The late plant taxonomist Arthur Cronquist is reputed to have said that “a good species is what a good taxonomist says it is”; 

Genome clustering, also an operational approach (Hull, 1997), continues to be used in bacteria, with delimitation of species being proposed for genomes with Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI) scores >95% (Konstantinidis et al., 2006; Jain et al., 2018)

The cladistic approach largely supplanted phenetics in eukaryotic systematics by the 1980s, after considerable and often vitriolic debate.

Like phenetic clustering approaches to species recognition, this approach does not make strong theoretical claims—its primary goal is classification (Zeng and Sanes, 2017). It also has some of the same problems as phenetics. Breaking up continuous variation can involve subjective decisions (e.g., Cembrowski and Menon, 2018; Sagar and Grün, 2020), and the identification of biologically meaningful clusters from the high dimensional data produced by expression of 20,000 or more genes (Efroni, 2018; Quake, 2021) makes clustering more an art than a science (Kobak and Berens, 2019; Capdevila et al., 2021).

What of cladistic approaches? Vickaryous and Hall (2006) reconstructed most parsimonious trees from a matrix of 19 biochemical, physiological, and morphological characters in their study of neuron diversity. However, they did not use this approach to define cell types, but rather to apportion predetermined cell types into groups in a hierarchical classification.

In contrast, the sister cell type theory of Arendt (2008) and Arendt et al. (2016, 2019) is explicitly phylogenetic, driven by the concept of homology as similarity due to common descent. A cell type is defined operationally as “a set of cells accessing the same regulatory program driving differentiation” (Arendt et al., 2019). 

 Another source of cryptic taxa is clinal variation, in which characters change gradually and continuously across the range of a species (Figure 8); clines can be caused by various phenomena, including primary divergence of populations into separate species and secondary contact between fully or partially differentiated taxa (Endler, 1977).

<!-- I loved the use of clinal variation to look at cell type diversity -->

e totality of its activity characterizes an ecological guild within the ecosystem of the organism.” He concluded that “we need an ecological definition of the cell type.” Such thinking is not new—Rowe and Stone (1977) concluded that cell type classifications should be treated as hypotheses concerning the cell’s “functional niche.” In this ecological view, each cell type is to a tissue or organ what an ecological species is to its ecosystem—each plays a particular functional role. Indeed, several other Clevers et al. (2017) authors mentioned “function” as a key criterion for defining cell type, despite the long-recognized difficulty of using function as an operational criterion (Rodieck and Brening, 1983).


Location is critical in cells as it is in real estate.

<!-- Excellent phrase -->

Börner et al. (2021) stated that for the human cell atlas, “The spatial location of cell types within anatomical structures matters,” and Weiss et al. (2022) concluded that for melanomas “the anatomic position of the cell of origin endows it with a unique transcriptional state that makes it susceptible to only certain oncogenic insults.” 
 
But just as cell lineage and cell type can be incongruent, the same transcriptomic cell types can occur in disjunct regions (Raj et al., 2018; Yuste et al., 2020).

For example, Yao et al. (2021) reported that although some of the 364 transcriptionally defined neuronal cell types they identified in the mouse isocortex were localized to very specific subregions or layers, most were much more broadly distributed.

Discordance between location and cell type is not limited to vertebrates: Achim et al. (2018) reported transcriptomic vs. regional incongruence in annelid larvae.

Should geographically disjunct but transcriptomically similar cells be split into different cell types? Xia and Yanai (2019) took the lumper approach: “the same cell type may be the integral building unit for many different tissues and/or organs” even though “such cell types that are found in multiple tissues and/or organs may not be exactly the same.”


Peng et al. (2021) found that neurons of the mouse brain could be divided into 11 different “projection neuron types” many of which could be further subdivided into narrower morphological subgroups. Although the major types correlated with regional transcriptome variation reported by Yao et al. (2021), this was not true at the fine-grained scale, with the same transcriptomic cell types in different brain regions having different morphologies

If genetic lineages are insufficient to define species (Freudenstein et al., 2016; Sukumaran et al., 2021), then other characters must play a role analogous to supervised clustering of transcriptomic data. Ideally, such characters should be related to the ecological role of species, at least under the Evolutionary Species Concept. 


Although metaphors are never perfect, there are many parallels between the problems of defining cell types and species (Figure 1), and this suggests that there may be lessons that the two very different communities could learn from each other. 

The area of nomenclature is illustrative. There is broad (though by no means universal) consensus among systematists that names should reflect phylogenetic relationships. But updating pre-Darwinian Linnean binomial nomenclature based on the avalanche of molecular phylogenetic and phylogenomic results is not a simple matter. Efforts from within the systematics community to produce an explicitly phylogenetic alternative to Linnean naming rules, called the Phylocode1, were met with hostility by many systematists, generating a war of words that was quite fierce a decade or more ago, and is still capable of eliciting vitriolic reactions (Brower, 2020).

creating a global body legally empowered to enforce a uniform process of species recognition and naming. Needless to say, the idea of involving lawyers in taxonomy and nomenclature was met with considerable pushback from others in the taxonomic community—the grim specter of Stalinist genetics was even evoked (Raposo et al., 2017).


In Nature’s “Scientific Correspondence” of August 1986, a very annoyed non-taxonomist excoriated taxonomists for inconveniencing yeast biologists by constantly changing scientific names (Barnett, 1986).

He blasted what he called the “romantic confusion of biological classification with evolutionary studies” and concluded that “Too many taxonomists appear to subscribe to this kind of sentimental codswallop.”