
What the Hack? – Towards a Taxonomy of Hackathons
=================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q116161066]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2019  

# Highlights

The paper at hand aims to develop a taxonomy of hackathons in order to illustrate their nature and underlying
characteristics. For this purpose, a systematic literature review is combined with
existing taxonomies or taxonomy-like artifacts (e.g. morphological boxes,
typologies) from similar research areas in an iterative taxonomy development
process

n. Therefore, since the beginning of the 21st century a paradigm
shift towards opening innovation changes the way how innovation processes are
designed and how external knowledge contributes to the development of new products
and services. As a bottom line of this so-called open innovation (OI) Chesbrough
[3 p. XXIV] states that companies “can and should use external ideas as well as internal
ideas, and internal and external paths to market


Hackathons can help companies, especially in the
early stages of innovation, to generate new ideas, develop concepts or test solutions [9].
Although hackathons are becoming more and more popular in practice, related research
is still in the fledgling stage.



Gassmann and Enkel [20] distinguish three types of OI: (1) outside-in OI describes the sourcing and acquisition of
expertise and ideas for the innovation process, while (2) inside-out OI focuses on the
exploitation of ideas and the results of innovation processes. If outside-in and inside-out
processes are combined, it is referred to as (3) coupled OI.

nd. We would like to emphasize that
there are many (scientific) publications on hackathons, which are also shown by the
results of our literature search. However, these describe single instances or potential
applications in specific areas and do not provide a consolidated and comprehensive
view of the phenomenon


For the
development of the taxonomy we apply the established method of Nickerson et al. [12],
which is guided by best practices from other research disciplines as well as the principles of Design Science Research [e.g. 32].


Thus, our taxonomy is mainly based on a systematic literature
review

Three iterations were carried out until the ending conditions
were reached:

• Open coding: In the first iteration (empirical-to-conceptual), we examined the
articles of the literature base according to the meta characteristic for statements on
design, execution and objectives of hackathons and grouped by similar
characteristics.

• Axial coding: In the second iteration (conceptual-to-empirical), existing taxonomies
or taxonomy-like artifacts (e.g. morphological boxes, typologies) from similar
research areas were included [e.g. 34–36] and compared with the attributes identified in the first iteration. In case of similarities, the dimensions and characteristics (partially modified) were included in the taxonomy.

• Selective coding: In the third iteration (empirical-to-conceptual), the characteristics
identified in the literature, which could not be assigned to any dimension in the
second iteration, were summarized in new dimensions and integrated into the
taxonomy

The first step is to define the scope, which can be described using Cooper’s literature
review taxonomy [37]. 

Strategic design decisions (SDD) tend to be abstract in character and
are derived from the overall goals and business model of organizations, while operational design decisions (ODD) mainly determine the workflow and processes that take
place during a hackathon



Table 3. Taxonomy of hackathons


l. In this direction,
our next step for further research is to study the relationships between individual
dimensions or characteristics. In particular, we want to show the interplay of SDD and
ODD dimensions in more detail and further develop the taxonomy into an ontology.



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q116161066)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q116161066)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q116161066&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-26619-6_23)  
