
GenomicKB: a knowledge graph for the human genome
=================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q117451200]  
  
Publication date : 01 of November, 2022  

# Highlights

GenomicKB consolidates information from over 30 resources, and includes 347 million genomic entities, 1.36 billion relations, and 3.9 billion entity and relation properties.

The frontend of GenomicKB allows users to query the knowledge graph with a visual interface, translating a point-and-click query into a graph database query that runs on a neo4j backend.

It uses a relatively flat structure, without URIs for entities and properties, using direct strings as identifiers. That makes it simple to understand but limits direct integration with other sources as it does not use Semantic Web standards. 


Although these consortia provided different insights at an unprecedented scale and depth, the separately-stored tabular data is inconvenient for genomic research and scientific discoveries.

To solve this problem, we build Genomic Knowledgebase (GenomicKB), which seamlessly integrates datasets and annotations related to the human genome into a knowledge graph.


To the best of our knowledge, this is the first graph pattern query system for the human genome, in which a query does not necessarily start with a genomic region or a specific genomic entity.

To build our knowledge graph system, we choose property graphs, one special type of data graphs, which specifies genomic entities (e.g. genes) as graph nodes, their relations (e.g. gene regulatory network) as edges, and additional information (e.g. gene descriptions) as node and edge properties. For implementation, we used neo4j (13), a native graph database, which efficiently implements the property graph model directly down to the storage level. The system also comes with an efficient query language (i.e. Cypher (14)) which supports constant-time traversals for both depth and breadth queries over data graphs.

The backend uses python Flask as the server program and neo4j as the graph database.

The workflow of a GenomicKB query includes two steps: (i) translation from a user’s query graph into Cypher (14) (GenomicKB’s backend query language) and (ii) returning the query result from the Cypher query


At the backend, the submitted query pattern is automatically translated into a Cypher query (14), and the query results are returned and visualized as graphs (Figure 1). With consolidated data and an intuitive query process, GenomicKB makes it easier for researchers to discover new genomic insights.



To record positional relations in GenomicKB, we first split all chromosomes into regions of a particular
size (i.e., resolution), represent each region as a node, and connect them with edges. The series of nodes and
edges are referred to as “chromosome chains”, which are constructed in 200, 1000, 5000, 10000, and 50000
base-pair resolutions. For example, the chain at 200-bp resolution is:
— chr1:0-199 — chr1:200-399 — chr1:400-599 — ...
Afterwards, nodes with determined coordinates connect to the corresponding chromosome chain nodes.
The users have to specify a resolution for their analysis. For example, entity A (chr1:0-199) and entity B
(chr1:400-599) do not overlap at 200-bp resolution but overlap at 1000-bp resolution.





imilar to the field of natural language processing in which new language models and question-answering systems are based on large knowledge graphs (45,46) (e.g. the Wiki knowledge graph), we expect that genomic research becomes increasingly data-driven, and GenomicKB provides high-quality and integrated data for large-scale machine learning methods and facilitates scientific discoveries.


1.3.1 A/B Compartments
The bigWig file for A/B compartments are collected from the 4DN data portal (4) (Table 1). The compartment eigenvector is calculated at 250 Kb resolution and a positive eigenvector indicates the fragment
is in A compartment. We merged adjacent 250 Kb fragments in the same compartment and obtain longer
-A-B-A-B- interspaced fragments. Each A or B fragment is represented as a node and connects to the
50000-resolution chain.




# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q117451200)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q117451200)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q117451200&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/NAR/GKAC957)  
