
The status of the human gene catalogue
======================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q117611053]  
  
Publication date : 24 of March, 2023  

# Highlights

Over the intervening years, much progress has been made
in identifying protein-coding genes, and the estimated number has shrunk to fewer than 20,000,
although the number of distinct protein-coding isoforms has expanded dramatically. The
invention of high-throughput RNA sequencing and other technological breakthroughs have led to
an explosion in the number of reported non-coding RNA genes, although most of them do not
yet have any known function.



Achieving the second goal, though, has been far more complicated than originally anticipated, despite a vast increase in
our knowledge of the location and function of tens of thousands of human genes

The Human Genome Project (HGP) was launched in 1990 with two central goals: “analyzing the
structure of human DNA” and “determining the location of all human genes”

In the sections that follow, we will consider how we can finish specific aspects of human gene annotation in the years to
come. These include 
(1) completing the list of protein-coding genes and all of their isoforms; 
(2) compiling a complete list of RNA genes of all lengths and varieties; and 
(3) identifying medically important genes and gene variants, and linking them to specific disorders. 
For each of these discussions, we will review where we are today, and what remains to be done, and then finally 
(4) we discuss technology needed to complete the annotation of human genes.

one recent database release suggests as few as ~19,000 (e.g., 19,370 in GENCODE Release 41).

Despite the overall
reduction in gene count, novel protein-coding genes continue to be identified, as well as
alternative isoforms of known genes.


The overlap between these annotation databases is relatively low34, illustrating how far we are
from a consensus on the identification of ncRNA genes. This rather fragmented landscape has
nonetheless delivered an impressive achievement in charting the enormous variety of noncoding
RNA genes.


Another challenge arises from the dissonance between standard annotation schemas, involving
clearly defined, yet arbitrarily defined genes and transcripts, with the messy biological reality of
ncRNA transcriptional units. 

Conventionally, genes are defined as the union of all overlapping
transcripts at a locus, and neighboring genes are separated by a clear gap. These definitions
worked well in the past. 

However, with the advent of deep and comprehensive long-read RNA
sequencing, annotations are approaching a point at which read-through transcription events will
begin to unite nearly all pairs of neighboring genes. 

Following classical gene definitions, the
result could be a single “super gene” on each chromosome46,47, which is clearly not a useful
abstraction.

The advent of a truly complete human genome sequence, T2T-CHM13, promises to provide
much more stability in gene coordinates. 2 Looking ahead, we are likely to have many reference
genomes for different human sub-populations. We already have annotated reference genomes for
Ashkenazi 59 , Puerto Rican 60 , and Han Chinese individuals 61 , and many more are likely to be
produced, as well as a “pan-genome” representing all populations. 

Ultimately, we need a gene-centric way of referring to the same gene, and the same mutations, on any human reference
genome.

Ribosomal profiling is a powerful
method for measuring the translation of protein-coding isoforms, and it can validate engagement
with the translational machinery for many predicted alternate isoforms.


<!-- I didn't understand exactly what you mean here. Do you mean a standard annotation? Something on the way SNPs are representend? Not clear hear.  -->

One of the biggest challenges in ncRNA annotation relates to adding functional labels. For
protein-coding genes, we have a rich amount of prior functional evidence, in addition to
powerful computational methods for predicting gene function based on primary sequence.

In contrast, noncoding RNA genes, particularly lncRNAs, are at an earlier stage of
understanding, and are still increasing in number, with current catalogs containing 17,000-20,000
lncRNAs or more.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q117611053)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q117611053)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q117611053&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2303.13996)  
 * [Full text URL](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2303.13996.pdf)  
 * [arXiv ID](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2303.13996.pdf)  
