
On the Potential of Artificial Intelligence Chatbots for Data Exploration of Federated Bioinformatics Knowledge Graphs
==========
  
  [@wikidata:Q118146461]  
  

# Highlights

We provide an insight, through selected examples from the SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics1
, into the areas where Conversational AI can assist researchers in benefiting from the
wealth of public bioinformatics data. The SIB is a federated institution by excellence, curating a growing catalog of interoperable bioinformatics knowledge graphs

To-date, only
a preprint is available [3], which compares ChatGPT against traditional Question Answering
Systems. In contrast, in this paper, we provide preliminary encouraging findings indicating that
a technology like ChatGPT could be employed directly as the translator of natural language
questions to knowledge graph queries, even in the more challenging case of federated queries.

However, the question we aim to answer is: given the currently narrow landscape of tools leveraging federated knowledge graphs, can technologies like ChatGPT support domain experts in exploring the available data?

Here, most of the explanation is factually correct and would provide helpful
support for a user with limited knowledge of SPARQL or the UniProt data model. However, we
also see a recurring problem in the generative model: identifiers are not accurately captured.

 Can you show me a SPARQL query that counts the number of mouse proteins in
UniProt?

The generated query is correct and directly executable at the UniProt SPARQL
endpoint. It is worth noting that the taxonomic identifier of “Mouse” is also correct, showing
that frequently used ones are also captured by the model

We provide the reverse example of the previous section - namely, we ask ChatGPT to generate
a federated SPARQL query using UniProt, OMA and Bgee for retrieving the rat orthologs
expressed in the brain of human genes associated with cancer.

 Licensing. Perhaps one of the most significant limitations is that although the research
version of ChatGPT is still free, the API isn’t, making reproducibility difficult. Recently
launched alternatives such as the LLaMa language models from META AI [12], might
provide a viable solution, with a free API.

While we provided here only a brief overview of potential uses for Conversational AI in
exploring public datasets, particularly federated knowledge graphs, the following preliminary
conclusions can already be drawn:

1. The importance of publicly available documentation for existing datasets is perhaps
higher than ever
2. Domain experts can use ChatGPT for explaining example SPARQL queries.
3. Despite these advantages, caution should still be exercised when using AI chatbots such
as ChatGPT


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q118146461)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q118146461)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q118146461&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
