
Q119787370
==========
  
  [@wikidata:Q119787370]  
  

# Highlights

Genetic approaches, such as the Barcode of Life programme, have improved the speed,
precision, and accuracy at with operational taxonomic units (OTU) can be delimited and
described (Hebert et al., 2003).

Existing low cost, rapid and scalable means of sampling and in situ digitisation can generate
coherent 3D models with high resolution features and mapping competent for taxonomic
description and comparative analyse

Recently, 3D datasets of specimens were generated
economically and quickly by photogrammetry, but this material either complemented the
holotype specimens


These specimens were compared against a confirmed reference specimen of Segonzacia
mesatlantica,
Therefore, 3D model crabs (cyber-specimens)
of the 45° North vent field were shared digitally demonstrate the applicability of the approach
for taxa identification

The study did highlight the efficacy of 3D imaging for deep-sea taxonomic studies. Probably the
most pertinent application of the digital clones is allowing for the sharing of samples safely
without the need of CITES permit across the globe in a manner that allows for online
comparison but also digital replication using 3D printers.

Moreover, this is a fully quantitative approach that can
lead to automated recognition and ecological analysis whatever the initial position of the
picture taken for in-field identification or citizen-science queries. Those 3D morphological
atlases can be used for population studies as they are a digital reference type. 

The application of cybertypes, not based on the type, goes beyond just digital-holotyping. The
data from multiple specimens, when combined as an atlas, can act as reference dataset that
incorporates an element of variability (Baldock et al., 2001).

The adoption of digital cybertyping can lower the carbon footprint of researchers and increase
the security of priceless type specimens. Neither scientists nor specimens need to travel for
research to be undertaken, digitised specimens can be shared via the web. This can support
open science, allowing for data mining at a larger scale than currently feasible. The digital
clones can support educational outreach; 3D printing can allow for rare specimens, especially
relevant for deep-sea, to be shared between museums and educational institutes (Figure 7).


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q119787370)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q119787370)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q119787370&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
