
An integrated cell atlas of the lung in health and disease
==========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q119496148]  
  
Publication date : 08 of June, 2023  

# Highlights

Here we present the integrated Human Lung Cell Atlas (HLCA), combining 49 datasets of the human respiratory system into a single atlas spanning over 2.4 million cells from 486 individuals

The HLCA presents a consensus cell type re-annotation with matching marker genes, including annotations of rare and previously undescribed cell types. Leveraging the number and diversity of individuals in the HLCA, we identify gene modules that are associated with demographic covariates such as age, sex and body mass index, as well as gene modules changing expression along the proximal-to-distal axis of the bronchial tree.


Using the HLCA as a reference for the study of disease, we identify shared cell states across multiple lung diseases, including SPP1+ profibrotic monocyte-derived macrophages in COVID-19, pulmonary fibrosis and lung carcinoma.

Recent reference atlases have led to the discovery of unknown cell types7,8,9, the identification of marker genes that are reproducible across studies7,10,11, the comparison of animal and in vitro models with human healthy and diseased tissue7,12,13 and patient stratification for disease endotypes14,15.

To build the HLCA, we collected single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data and detailed, harmonized technical, biological and demographic metadata from 14 datasets (11 published and three unpublished)

hese datasets include samples from 107 individuals, with diversity in age, sex, ethnicity (harmonized as detailed in Methods), BMI and smoking status (Fig. 2a). 

UMAP of HLCA clusters annotated as rare epithelial cell types (that is, ionocytes, neuroendocrine cells and tuft cells). Final annotations, original labels and the study of origin are shown (top), as well as the expression of ionocyte marker FOXI1, tuft cell marker LRMP and neuroendocrine marker CALCA (bottom)

Similarly, a high diversity of (contradictory) cell type labels (high label entropy) can identify both annotation disagreements between studies and clusters of doublets (Methods). 
Most clusters (61 out of 94) showed low label entropy, suggesting overall agreement of coarse cell type labels across datasets (Fig. 3b). 
The remaining 33 clusters exhibited high label entropy, highlighting cellular phenotypes that were differently labeled across datasets (Fig. 3b).
For example, the immune cluster with the highest label entropy contained many cells that were originally mislabeled as monocytes and macrophages but were actually type 2 dendritic cells.


Each of the 61 annotated cell types (Supplementary Table 5) was detected in at least four datasets out of 14, often in specific parts of the respiratory system, and different cell types showed varying fractions of proliferating (MKI67+) cells (Extended Data Fig. 2a–c). 

 The fully re-annotated HLCA core thus combines data from a diverse set of studies to provide a carefully curated reference for cell type annotations and marker genes in healthy lung tissue.


 Furthermore, sex is most associated with transcriptomic variation in lymphatic endothelial cells, whereas BMI is most associated with variation in B and T cells, harmonized ethnicity in transitional club-AT2 cells and smoking status in innate lymphoid/natural killer cells.

Yet, combining datasets in the HLCA core provides better power for identifying these rare cell types. Ionocytes, tuft and neuroendocrine cells make up only 0.08, 0.01 and 0.02% of the cells in the HLCA core according to the original labels, and were originally identified in only seven, two and four datasets out of 14, respectively. Despite their low abundance, these cells formed three separate clusters of the HLCA core (Fig. 3f).


We were further able to detect six cell identities that were not previously found in the human lung or were only recently described in individual studies. These cell types include migratory dendritic cells31,32 (n = 312 cells, expressing CCR7, LAD1 and COL19), hematopoietic stem cells (n = 60, expressing SPINK2, STMN, PRSS57 and CD34), highly proliferative hillock-like epithelial cells not previously reported in adult human lung (n = 4,600, expressing KRT6A, KRT13 and KRT14), the recently described alveolar type 0 cells (n = 1,440, expressing STFPB+, SCGB3A2+, SFTPChigh and SCGB3A1low) and the closely related preterminal bronchiole secretory cells (n = 4,393, expressing SFTPB+, SCGB3A2+, SFTPClow and SCGB3A1high, together with alveolar type 0 cells called transitional club-AT2 cells)33,34 and a subset of smooth muscle cells (n = 335) that to our knowledge have not previously been described (Fig. 3d,g and Extended Data Fig. 4a–f)

<!-- Already covered on Wikidata! It seems like I did a good job :)  -->

These smooth muscle cells, predominantly found in the airways, express canonical smooth muscle markers (CNN1 and MYH11) and also uniquely and consistently express FAM83D across datasets (Extended Data Fig. 4e,f). The HLCA core thus enables improved detection and identification of rare cell types, as well as the discovery of unknown cell types.

We tested this on a recently released multimodal lung dataset40 (Methods, Fig. 6a and Extended Data Fig. 6). Overall, the transferred labels were correct in the majority of cases, with 68% of the cells correctly labeled, 14% of labels incorrectly labeled and 18% set to unknown due to highly uncertain labeling (Fig. 5b and Methods). Uncertain labels were observed specifically in continuous transitions from one cell type to another and among cellular identities not present in the HLCA core, including rare cell identities (erythrocytes (n = 328), chondrocytes (n = 42), myelinating Schwann cells (n = 7), nonmyelinating Schwann cells (n = 29) and nerve-associated fibroblasts (n = 66)





# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q119496148)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q119496148)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q119496148&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41591-023-02327-2)  
