
A consensus cell type atlas from multiple connectomes reveals principles of circuit stereotypy and variation
============================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q120129969]  
  
Publication date : 27 of June, 2023  

# Highlights

Here we report the systematic and hierarchical annotation of this ~130,000-neuron connectome including neuronal classes, cell
types and developmental units (hemilineages)

This enables any researcher to navigate this
huge dataset and find systems and neurons of interest, linked to the literature through the
Virtual Fly Brain database2

Crucially, this resource includes 4,179 cell types of which 3,166
consensus cell types are robustly defined by comparison with a second dataset, the
“hemibrain” connectome3
. Comparative analysis showed that cell type counts and strong
connections were largely stable, but connection weights were surprisingly variable within and
across animals.

Finally, and surprisingly, about one third of the cell
types recorded in the hemibrain connectome could not be robustly identified in the FlyWire
connectome, cautioning against defining cell types based on single connectomes. 


We propose that a cell type should be robust to inter-individual variation, and therefore defined
as a group of cells that are more similar to cells in a different brain than to any other cell in
the same brain.


<!-- Very good article and. Interesting definition of cell type and very good that the interest for intellectual frameworks for defining cell types are growing.

I have some comments, however, on the phrasing of your definition (sic) of a cell type. 
The phrase I am concerned about is "We propose that a cell type should be robust to inter-individual variation, and therefore defined as a group of cells that are more similar to cells in a different brain than to any other cell in the same brain."

There is also a very similar variation to it in Fig. 6 that shares the same difficulties: 

"Cell type is defined as a group of neurons which is more similar to a group in another brain than to anything in the same brain"

It is repeated with variations once more further in the text with the same problems: 

"To address these complex typing issues we employ a new definition of cell type that
uses inter-animal variability to determine when cell types should be split: A cell type is a
group of neurons that is more similar to a group of neurons in another brain than to any other
neuron in the same brain"


1. It is also not clear if you are stating how "cell type", the idea, should be defined, or how different cell types should be delimited. 

Are you defining the concept of "cell type"? Or are you suggesting a methodology for identifying cells of the same type in practice? 

A subtle, but very important distinction. 

2. It is also important to notice that this is not a general definition of "cell type", as it is scoped to Drosophila melanogaster brain connectomes. This is obvious from context but needs to be explicit for it to be a precise definition. . 

A definition that says "A cell type is a group of neurons" excludes all non-neuronal cells and is incompatible with the use of "cell type" for all other non-neuronal cells.

You would be more precise by saying "A neuronal cell type is a group of neurons". 
Also, not all neurons are in brains, so the definition also needs to make that clear.



3. "A group of cells that are more similar to cells in a different brain" -- The beggining of the sentence seems to refer to ALL brains, and then it says that this group is more similar to cells in a DIFFERENT brain. These similar cells in the DIFFERENT brain are NOT part of the group? Are cell types restricted to single brains? 


Some rephrashings that  try and prevent that paradox, and could be what the authors mean, would be: 

"A group of cells that are are more similar to each other, even among different individuals,  than they are to other cells in the same individual."

Or even: 

"For any individual, each cell type is defined as a group of cells that are more similar to cells in a different brain than to any other cell in the same brain."


3. The definition needs a quantifiable similarity metric. In the case of the study, it seems to be based on patterns of connectivity and morphology.

It does, however, brings up the question: what about other kinds of similarity? Are they less useful? 
In terms of genome content (e.g. SNPs), they will be always more similar to cells in the same individual. 
Does the existence of different cell types depend on the similarity metric used? 
Is this a contextualized, procedural definition? 

These should be clear, otherwise the definition is overstating and might bring up confusion.

The algorithmic implementation you present is very data-dependent, as it considers it mandatory presence of the type in each of the 3 individual hemispheres



4. The looseness of the "similarity" ends up including cell states and other extraneous groups of cells.
 E.g. "apoptotic cells" are more similar to each other than to others, or "cycling cells" or even very artificial cell types such as "big neurons", whose size will be more similar to each other than cells in other brains.

You implement a particular, and complex, system based on connectivity and morphology, but these details are not part of your definition.

5. You don't make it clear if the the definition is restricted to a species or is a larger definition of cell type across nature. 
The different brains you mention are only in Drosophila? Or a particular species of Drosophila? A particular strain?  
If just a strain contains a set of cells with a particular connectivipy pattern, but other strains don't, do you _really_ want to call it a cell type? 


To sum up, these notes intend on bringing up the subtleties in defining the concept of "cell type".

To make it less ambiguous one possible phrasing would be: 

"We propose that cell types should be robust to inter-individual variation. Cells of the same type should be more similar to each other then to other cells. For our Fly Brain Cell Atlas, each cell type corresponds to a set of Drosophila brain neurons that are, by connectivity, more similar to neurons in other individuals then to other cells in the same brain."

If you want to talk about the concept of cell type, using some formal ontology vocabulary,  you could say that: 

"We define the concept of "cell type" as a group of cells for which any two cells share a similar connectivity and morphology, to a higher extent then to any other cell outside the group."

In this way, you include cells of different individuals under the same cell type umbrella, without ambiguity. 

Of course, then you need to define what you mean by a "similar connectivity pattern". 

It is very weird that you say that  "A cell type is a falsifiable hypothesis about biological variability within and
across animals34", AND that you tested such hypothesis, because that is not what you do in your system.  

You have data-driven neuron types, with identifiable individuals across 3 datasets. 

Now they may form each a falsifiable hypothesis. Which hypothesis is that? How can one falsify it? That is unclear, and unless you specify it, unadressable. 

You mention that "Crucially, this resource includes 4,179 cell types of which 3,166
consensus cell types are robustly defined by comparison with a second dataset, the
“hemibrain” connectome3"

So, if your analysis FALSIFIED the hypothesis, you should not even mention the ~1000 cell types that were FALSIFIED. 

You are not using the hypothetico-deductive method, and the "falsifiable hypothesis" system is not fit for your work, as it is data-driven, iterative and induction-based (and not deduction-based), without random sampling and a low N. 

However, it is an excelent work! You just cannot say your resource is different becaus it treats cell types as  falsifiable hypothesis to be tested, and then not rejecting in the light of falsification. 

Anyways, these are some theoretical considerations. 

The work is, of course, solid science and adds much to the state of the art. 

The theoretical formulations are still not at the same quality of the analysis pipelines and experiments.
I hope at least some of these comments will be useful, with the goal of refining definitions of cell type for increased precision and usefulness. 

All the best,

Tiago Lubiana
tiago.lubiana.alves@usp.br




-->

At the most basic level, navigating this connectome would be extremely challenging without
a comprehensive system of annotations, which we now provide. Our annotations provide an
indexed and hierarchical human-readable parts list33,35, allowing biologists to explore their
systems and neurons of interest

Annotations defining different kinds of neurons are key to exploring and interpreting any
connectome; but with the FlyWire connectome now exceeding the 100,000 neuron mark,
they are also both of increased significance and more challenging to generate.
<!-- This use of "definition" is very loose -->

We defined a
comprehensive, systematic, and hierarchical set of annotations, based on the anatomical
organisation of the brain (Figure 1; Supplemental Video 1+2), as well as the developmental
origin and coarse morphology of neurons (Figure 2)
-->


n. For this reason although coarser annotations are
provided brainwide, our finest scale cell typing focuses on neurons with processes in the
central brain. Nevertheless this represents most cell types in the fly brain; while intrinsic
neurons of the optic lobe are the majority of neurons in the fly brain, their highly parallel
architecture means they contain only about 200 cell types36,37, or approximately 20x fewer
than the central brain.


The first two levels, flow and superclass, were densely annotated: every neuron is
either afferent, efferent or intrinsic to the brain (flow) and falls into one of the 9 superclasses:
sensory (periphery→brain), motor (brain→periphery), endocrine (brain→ring gland),
ascending (ventral nerve cord→brain), descending (brain→ventral nerve cord), visual
projection (optic lobes→central brain), visual centrifugal (central brain→optic lobes), 

The class field contains pre-existing neurobiological groupings from the literature
(e.g. for central complex neurons; see Supplemental Table S3) and is sparsely annotated
(40% of the central brain), in large part because past research has favoured some brain
areas over others.

The remaining neurons are
typeable even if they cannot be unambiguously linked to previously reported cell types, and
we provide a path for this below (“Toward multi-connectome cell typing”).

In total, we
collected over 720k annotations for all 127,978 neurons; all are available for download and
580k are already visible in codex.flywire.ai under the Classification heading for each cell.

We find striking stereotypy in the number of central brain intrinsic neurons: e.g.
between the left and the right hemisphere they differ by only 35 (0.1%) neurons


Our top-level annotations (flow, superclass, class) provide a systematic but relatively coarse
grouping of neurons compared to the order 5000 terminal cell types from previous work3
. We
therefore developed an intermediate level of annotation based on hemilineages – this
provides a powerful bridge between neurons placed within circuits in the connectome and
the developmental origin and molecular specification of neurons (Figure 2A).

Each neuroblast typically produces two
hemilineages43,44 that differ markedly in neuronal morphology and can express different
neurotransmitters from one another, but neurons in each hemilineage usually expresses a
single fast-acting transmitter38,45. Hemilineages therefore represent a natural functional as
well as developmental unit by which to study the nervous system. 

We tentatively designated 3,614 (10.4%)
as primary neurons either based on specific identification in the literature42 or expert
assessment of diagnostic morphological features such as broader projections and larger cell
bodies

Although hemilineages typically contain functionally and morphologically related
neurons, morphology subgroups can be observed53. We further divided each hemilineage
into “morphology groups” which innervate similar brain regions and take similar internal
tracts by NBLAST54 morphological clustering, naming them based on their relative similarity
(Figure 2I, Figure S2.1, Supplemental Files 2 and 3; Supplemental Video 3) This generated
a total of 700 groupings which provide an intermediate layer of annotations above the cell
type level.

NBLAST morphology clustering initially yielded 5235 morphology types; multiple rounds of
CBLAST connectivity clustering split 257 of these morphology types into 639 connectivity
types for a final total of 5620 types.


n total, we assigned 3,166 high-confidence consensus cell type labels for 42,687
neurons from three different hemispheres and two different brains (e.g. Figure 3B).
Collectively these cross-matched neurons cover 38.1% of central brain edges (comprising
40.7% of synapses) in the FlyWire graph. This body of high-confidence cross-identified
neurons enables both within- (FlyWire left versus right hemisphere) and across-brain
(FlyWire vs hemibrain) comparisons


At the extreme, “singleton” cell types account for
65% of all types in our sample; they often appear to be embryonic-born, or early secondary neurons, and only very rarely comprise more than one neuron: only 2% of neurons that are
singletons in both FlyWire hemispheres have more than 1 member in the hemibrain

Here, we use the consensus cell types to
assess which connections are reliably observed across three hemispheres of connectome
data. We use the term “edge” to describe the set of connections between two cell types, and
its “weight” as the number of unitary synapses forming that connection

<!-- Connection between two cell types cannot be data-driven, as it includes cel type definitions. -->

Given an edge between two cell types in one hemisphere, what are the odds of
finding the same connection in another hemisphere or brain?

<!-- cell types are defined by connections and connections are applied between cell types (and not cells)? This is confusing. -->

KCs further divide into 5
main cell types based on which parts of the mushroom body they innervate: KCab, KCab-p,
KCg-m, KCa’b’ and KCg-d (Figure 5B). Of those, KCab, KCa’b’ and KCg-m are the primary
recipients of largely random59,68 (but see 69) olfactory input via ~130 antennal lobe projection
13
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.06.27.546055; this version posted June 27, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
neurons (ALPNs) comprising 58 canonical types59,60

As the first dense, large-scale connectome of a fly brain, the hemibrain dataset proposed
over 4000 previously unknown new cell types. The majority of these new types were
generated by NBLAST morphology clustering followed by multiple rounds of CBLAST
connectivity clustering and extensive manual review


This raises the question of how reproducible the hemibrain cell types are
and, more generally, of how to incorporate multiple connectomes into the definition of cell
type.

.
During the mapping of hemibrain cell types to the FlyWire dataset (Figure 3),
mapping failures fell into three cases:
1. Two or more hemibrain types were inappropriately split and had to be merged (Figure
3E).
2. A hemibrain type was under-split and had to be split further (Figure 3F).
3. Subsets of neurons within two or more hemibrain cell types co-clustered with different
groups of FlyWire neurons, suggesting type misassignment.


Case 3, however, suggests that some hemibrain cell types are not
replicable across brains and the neurons in question require retyping. This category also
included particularly difficult cases suggestive of continuous variation (see Methods –
Hemibrain cell type matching)

The cell type atlas that we provide of 4,179 cell types is not the largest ever proposed
(the hemibrain had 5,620, and very new work in the mouse brain has offered up to 5,000
molecular clusters77–79). 

A cell type is a falsifiable hypothesis about biological variability within and
across animals34. In C. elegans, the 118 cell types inferred from the original connectome
have been clearly supported by analysis of subsequent connectomes and molecular
data4,5,80–82. In a few cases in mammals, it has been possible to produce catalogues of order
100 cell types that have been validated by multimodal data e.g. in the retina or motor
cortex35,83,84. 

However, large scale molecular atlases produce highly informative hierarchies
but do not yet try to define terminal cell types – the finest unit that is robust across
individuals – with precision

Here, to our knowledge for the first time, we test this falsifiable
cell type hypothesis for over 5,000 cell types, confirming or correcting about 3,166 cell types
across 3 hemispheres of connectome data.

It is important to note that connectome data is
particularly powerful for cell typing: it is inherently multimodal (by providing morphology and
connectivity) and the ability to see all cells within a brain (completeness) is uniquely
powerful. Cell types that have passed this rigorous test are very unlikely to be revised
(permanence).


<!-- This notion of "terminal cell types" is interesting, but needs working. It is not a conceptualy solid unit. What do you mean by robust? And finest? Do you mean across ALL individuals or accross some? Is this species-specific? Gender-specific? Age specific? Disease status specific?

This argument is false, as many transcriptomic atlases are integrative. You have a merit: explicitly considering inter-individual variability. But you have not set falsifiable hypotheses.   -->
Informed by this understanding, the additional 850 cell types defined solely
within the two hemispheres of the FlyWire dataset should also be accurate and permanent.
<!-- Why?  -->

We suspect that connectome data will become the gold standard for cell typing.

<!-- For Drosophila neurons, maybe. But, you know, people do study other stuff.  -->

It is natural to feel some surprise, perhaps even disappointment, that over a third of
hemibrain cell types could not yet be identified in FlyWire. It is important to temper this by
reiterating that the majority can be identified and we expect continued incremental
improvements through our own efforts and those of other research colleagues building on
the platform and tools now in pla

Cell typing reduces the complexity of the connectome graph. This has important implications
for analysis, modelling, experimental work and developmental biology. For the cell types
already assigned, we can map 40,950 nodes in the raw connectome graph onto 4,179 nodes
in the reduced cell type graph;

Have we collected a snowflake?
The field of connectomics has long been criticised for unavoidably low N93,94: is the brain of a
single specimen representative for all? For insects, there is a large body of evidence for
morphological and functional stereotypy, although this information is only available for a
minority of neurons and much less is known about stereotyped connectivit

n conclusion, we can say that we have not collected a snowflake; the core FlyWire
connectome is highly conserved and the accompanying annotations will be broadly useful
across all studies of Drosophila melanogaster


This pipeline is implemented in the coconatfly package (see Table 1), which provides a
streamlined interface to carry out such clustering. For example the following command can
be used to see if the types given to a selection of neurons in the Lateral Accessory Lobe
(LAL) are robus



# Comments




## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q120129969)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q120129969)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q120129969&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.06.27.546055)  
