
Q121133260
==========
  
  [@wikidata:Q121133260]  
  

# Highlights


The gene–disease causal evidence has been enhanced and expanded to better capture disease causality across rare, common, and somatic diseases.

We have also introduced new machine learning applications for knowledge extraction from the published literature, clinical trial information, and drug labels.

Powered with an in-house target identification scoring framework, evidence is aggregated across sources to provide ranked lists of gene–disease associations. To maintain up-to-date-evidence, ensure regular updates from external data sources and integrate user feedback and new features, the Platform is released five times a year.


Moreover, our open-source code has been re-used by the NIH National Cancer Institute Childhood Cancer Data Initiative to develop and launch a customised Molecular Targets Platform that integrates patient-specific data, aiming to facilitate therapeutic hypotheses building and target discovery in paediatric cancer (https://moleculartargets.ccdi.cancer.gov/). 


Moreover, gene burden constitutes the first ancestry-specific evidence in the Platform, a feature that will be expanded to other data sources where possible.

The bibliography widget allows users to interrogate the literature by entity, displaying a list of publications mentioning the selected term. The user can also expand the selection by including other suggested entities in the search based on the similarity of their BioBERT-driven descriptors to the previously selected terms.

. Similarly, a newly designed GraphQL API serves the information to a brand new React web application that was released to the public in June 2021.





# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q121133260)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q121133260)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q121133260&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  

# Reading dates
  
 * 2023-08-03
