
Q121484541
==========
  
  [@wikidata:Q121484541]  
  

# Highlights

Here, we review our current understanding of transcription factor (TF) networks as key determinants of cell identity. We discuss the concept of the core regulatory circuit as a set of TFs and interacting factors that together define the gene expression profile of the cell. We propose the core regulatory circuit as a comprehensive conceptual framework for defining cellular identity and discuss its connections to cell function in different contexts.


Nevertheless, the cell’s phenotype and functional characteristics ultimately represent the readout of a specific gene-expression program.


The concept that differentiated cell identity is established and continuously maintained by a set of TFs was proposed several decades ago (Blau & Baltimore, 1991). 
This was supported by pioneering studies with cell hybrids and heterokaryons, in which terminally differentiated cells could be successfully reprogrammed into muscle cells by cell fusion (Weiss & Green, 1967; Blau et al, 1983; Pomerantz et al, 2009), and later by gain-of-function approaches based on key TFs (Davis et al, 1987). 


A TSG was defined as a gene that specifies individual identities by directly controlling the expression of a set of downstream differentiation genes (a.k.a. effector genes) via common cis-regulatory motifs (a.k.a. terminal selector motifs) (Hobert, 2008). 


For example, PBX/CEH-20, part of the PBX TALE (three-amino-acid loop extension) homeodomain proteins (Selleri et al, 2019), was first identified to initiate and maintain the terminally differentiated state of dopaminergic (DA) neurons, thereby acting as a TSG (Doitsidou et al, 2013). 


Given that DA neurons are degenerated in individuals with Parkinson’s disease, building the CRC network in DA neurons will not only enrich our understanding of this cell type, but also, potentially, contribute to the development of disease therapies (see section “Assigning functional relevance to CRCs”).

Furthermore, seminal studies from embryonic stem cells (ESCs) have revealed that a small set of TFs, such as NANOG, SOX2, and OCT4, called core TFs, not only bind to their own loci, but also mutually regulate one another, thereby forming cross-regulated feed-forward loops that maintain pluripotency (Boyer et al, 2005). The core TFs and their interconnected auto-regulatory loops have been termed “core regulatory circuitry” (CRC) (Boyer et al, 2005; Young, 2011).

Based on such a model, the origin of a new cell type in evolution coincides with the occurrence of a unique CoRC, distinct from its evolutionary sister cell type (Arendt, 2008; Arendt et al, 2016). While the primary function of CRC or CoRC factors is to keep cells in a stable differentiated state, the notion of GRN describes a temporally hierarchical framework of gene expression that controls a differentiation process and adapts in response to external signals and other influences during development (Davidson, 2010; Marioni & Arendt, 2017) (Fig 1B).

To date, most of our knowledge is based on the use of expression profiles of core TFs as a proxy for CRCs.

Cell type-enriched sets of TFs, the main components of CRCs, are still primarily discovered by transcriptome analyses (Xia & Yanai, 2019) (Fig 2A)

 Kelley et al (2018) used scRNA-seq data to examine cell-type variations across brain regions in intact human tissue. This resulted in a robust strategy to define gene modules enriched in major neuronal subtypes, which they termed “core transcriptional identities” (Kelley et al, 2018; Menon, 2018).

 . A valuable alternative is snRNA-seq which can be applied to archived frozen samples and provides less biased cellular coverage (Bakken et al, 2018)


 However, clustering based on differential gene expression might overlook the fact that cell states, such as the cell cycle or stress, are also captured (Kiselev et al, 2019). By contrast, by defining cell identity using the concept of CRCs, a given cell is expected to show a unique set of TFs regardless of its state, which would help to distinguish between cell types and cell states. 


 Mist1 and Ptf1a, two TFs involved in the CRC of pancreatic acini, exemplify the way in which various technologies complement one another to inform our knowledge of CRCs.
  

High levels of histone H3 lysine-27 acetylation (H3K27ac) typically mark active proximal and distal (e.g., enhancers) regulatory elements, while monomethylated H3 lysine-4 (H3K4me1) marks primed or active enhancers in the absence or presence of H3K27ac, respectively (Shlyueva et al, 2014)

For example, single-cell ATAC-seq (scATAC-seq) can reveal cell-specific regulatory signatures characteristic of CRCs (Fullard et al, 2018

, ARACNe is an algorithm which identifies potential TFs and putative target genes by “mutual information”, a measure of mutual dependence in information theory (Basso et al, 2005)

In developmental systems, the concept of cell state refers to cell fate transition along a particular developmental trajectory (Kester & van Oudenaarden, 2018). With time included as a variable, more advanced computational methods are needed that can integrate data across a time scale. 

The concept of CRC not only provides a more comprehensive way of defining cell identities but might also have direct implications in regenerative medicine.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q121484541)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q121484541)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q121484541&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  

# Reading dates
  
 * 2023-08-15
