
What is a cell type?
==========
  
  [@wikidata:Q121603215]  
  

# Highlights

The resulting cell atlases provide insight into the organization, ontogeny, and evolution of human tissues. They also help to explore disease susceptibilities, navigate therapy development, and benchmark cell and tissue engineering. However, the atlas data can often identify phenotypic diversity (referred to as different cell states) among cells of the same type, raising the following question: What is a human cell type?

This would enable human cell phenoscapes—the landscape of all possible cell phenotypes—to be charted. The totality of phenotypes under all possible perturbations describes a local phenoscape for each individual cell type.

Existing cell atlases describe current features, and sometimes the developmental history, of a cell but cannot provide information on the factors that dictate development or predict future cell states.


Some perturbations alter a cell’s molecular state in a reversible manner

some perturbations can irreversibly change the type of the cell by inducing a new stable state

However, the availability and diversity of such tissues is limited, and associations between perturbation and cell phenotype are usually correlative. Furthermore, the number of possible perturbations is vast.


To address these limitations, perturbations need to be induced and cell responses characterized under controlled experimental conditions in high throughput, which requires the use of in vitro model systems


New methods are emerging that provide information on the proteome, metabolome, lipidome, and other molecular features of individual cells from dissociated tissue and in situ. This enhanced characterization, along with computational approaches to integrate the data, will provide more nuanced distinctions of cell types and states. 

Ultimately, predictive modeling of perturbations may provide a way to establish when this seemingly boundless phenoscape has been sufficiently charted. With appropriate models, an expanding phenoscape atlas will lead to reduced uncertainty and enhanced accuracy for predictions of the effects of unseen perturbations. Therefore, “completeness,” at least within a specific context, would be approached if the effects of unseen perturbations can be accurately predicted and gathering further data results in marginal improvements in prediction accuracy. Model uncertainty can then serve as a valuable compass for informing future study designs, with the aim of systematically mapping unexplored regions of the phenoscape.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q121603215)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q121603215)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q121603215&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  

# Reading dates
  
 * 2023-08-18
