
Q122826322
==========
  
  [@wikidata:Q122826322]  
  

# Highlights

Simpler nervous systems of some gastropod mollusks, annelids, and nematodes revealed identified neurons with defined transmitter specificity and functions. Early systematic studies pointed out that most of the neurons composing their nervous systems might be unique (Bullock and Horridge, 1965). 


Today, with advances in single-cell (epi)genomics and transcriptomics, the astonishing diversity of neuronal cell types exceeds any imagination (Moroz, 2018). The most straightforward question is, how different are the neurons? But more fundamental questions are: Why are neurons different? Why are there so many neurotransmitters? Why are neurotransmitters different? These questions have been addressed by many (Kandel, 1979; Van Vallen, 1982; Bloom, 1984), aiming for functional aspects.



In 1968–1974 these questions were asked from an evolutionary standpoint, and Dmitry Sakharov had proposed the hypothesis of neuronal polygeny (=multiple origins of neurons) (Sakharov, 1970a,b, 1972, 1974a,b). Using minimal comparative data available 50 years ago, Sakharov suggested that neurons evolved from genetically different secretory cells.


A chemoconnectome is defined as an entire set of neurotransmitters, neuromodulators, neuropeptides, and receptors supporting chemical transmission in an animal (as illustrated for Drosophila by Deng et al., 2019). However, visualization of dynamic chemoconnectomes (which can change in time: from milliseconds to hours and days), is a much greater challenge than reconstructing traditional connectomes, static descriptions of synaptic wiring.

I would conclude that the current biodiversity of species with the astonishing diversity of secretory and signaling mechanisms, neurons and synapses, neural and alternative integrative systems are true Gifts of Nature to neuroscientists and humankind. We are only getting the first surprises from these gifts. We are only starting to taste novel fundamental insights and paradigm shifts in this endeavor. It might be controversial, but the shortcut to better understanding our brains and neurological disorders and regenerative medicine of the future is studying small creatures in the world ocean. Admittedly, not all marine creatures can be brought to the lab and cultured. But we now have the capacity to bring labs to the sea (Moroz, 2015b) and expand frontiers of the living world and ourselves.

<!-- Beautiful! -->

# Comments

In this work, Leonid Moroz presents his perspective on the origins of neurons, tracing back from the literature in the 1970s until current scRNAseq projects. Influenced by Arendt's sister cell types, he presents how since the 1970's scientists are aware of *the existence of conservative neuronal cell types separated by million years of divergent evolution.* Based on that similar neurotransmitters are present across all animals, Leonid provides a deep review of the literature, summarizing and concatenating findings. He explores especially the origin of neurons from secretory cells and the multiple, complex evolutionary patterns. The work provides a rich understanding not only of the topic, but on how the field progressed through the decades. By expressing clear postulates related to the polygeny hypothesis, Moroz provides a solid framework for theoretical progress, of the kind the ontological discussions of what a cell type is might benefit from. 


## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q122826322)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q122826322)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q122826322&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  

# Reading dates
  
 * 2023-09-25
