
The evolving definition of plant cell type
==========
  
  [@wikidata:Q122518681]  
  

# Highlights

In 1665 Robert Hooke, looking at cork through his microscope, discovered that plants are composed of elementary structures he named “cells”

How many kinds of cells—”cell types”—an organism possesses of course depends on the organism’s cellular complexity, but the plasticity within a cell type fuels the emergence of the concept of cell state (Figure 1).

Furthermore, unsupervised clustering of cells based on their transcriptomic (and/or epigenomic) signatures has proven effective in discovering previously unidentified cell types and cell states and providing new insight into cellular heterogeneity within a cell type

Classifying cells is necessary to conceptualize the biological complexity of some organs like the human brain or the plant root. But how should this be done? What criteria should be used, or, if several criteria are used, how should they be prioritized?

Given the proliferation of animal cell atlases (e.g., Packer et al., 2019; Mittnenzweig et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Jain et al., 2023), one might assume that the problem of cell type definition has been resolved. But Li et al. (2022) note that cell type definition remains a key challenge for atlases. It is generally agreed that the definition of a cell type should reflect intrinsic properties (i.e., the final fate and role of each cell in the body) and transient behaviors of each cell type (Morris, 2019).


the Drosophila cell atlas defines a cell type as “a transcriptomic cluster detected at any clustering resolution that could be separated by the expression of known marker genes from other clusters” (Li et al., 2022). 


Such a hierarchical system allows the recognition of cell types at various levels of granularity (Fishell and Kepecs, 2020). Such an approach allowed the authors of an atlas of the human intestine to group “an immense diversity of phenotypically and morphologically distinct cell types” into a small number of “broad cell types” (e.g., immune vs. stromal) whose relative frequencies varied among spatially restricted “neighborhoods” along the intestinal tract (Hickey et al., 2023)

It is hypothesized that what defines “cell types” are repertoires of transcription factors (TFs; Hobert et al., 2016; Lambert et al., 2018; Liang et al., 2018; Almeida et al., 2021; Isbel et al., 2022)

<!-- Repertoire is a very good choice of wording -->

 Arendt et al. (2019) define a cell type as “a set of cells accessing the same regulatory program driving differentiation”

 Recently, Domcke and Shendure (2023) proposed an explicitly lineage-based definition of cell types and their relationships that they contend will serve cell biology better than transcriptional cell types organized into atlases

We conclude that although the transcriptomic cell type concept (Zeng, 2022) is prevalent in the animal cell atlas community, the approach has recognized limitations. Thus, the debate over what constitutes a cell type in theory, and how to identify cell types in practice, is likely to continue for the foreseeable future, like the debate over species (Doyle, 2022).

<!-- Very good overview. Now to the plant bit! -->

Recent reviews of plant single-cell biology (e.g., Ryu et al., 2021; Bawa et al., 2022; CuPerus, 2022; Xu and Jackson, 2023) use the term “cell type” extensively, but do not define the term explicitly, and in this they follow the papers they cite. For example, Xu and Jackson (2023) list 35 flowering plant single-cell studies, most on Arabidopsis and maize, none of which include a precise definition of “cell type”. 


Implicitly, papers using sc/snRNA-seq methods employ the transcriptomic cell type (Zeng, 2022). 


Human cell atlases now routinely incorporate spatial transcriptomics approaches (Jain et al., 2023), and this level of resolution is now possible in plants, as well (Giacomello, 2021; Nobori et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023). For example, recently Cervantes-Pérez et al. (2023) and Sun et al. (2023) 

In conclusion, the transcriptomic definition of a cell type is currently dominant in the era of single cell multiomics, both in animals and in plants. It is currently a useful concept for many practical purposes. But “scientific progress accelerates when paradigm shifts occur”, and we assume that the definition of cell type will evolve, ultimately illustrating this maxim for plant biology.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q122518681)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q122518681)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q122518681&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  

# Reading dates
  
 * 2023-09-14
