
CZ CELLxGENE Discover: A single-cell data platform for scalable exploration, analysis and modeling of aggregated data
=====================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q123362109]  
  
Publication date : 02 of November, 2023  

# Highlights

Here, we present CZ CellxGene Discover (cellxgene.cziscience.com), a data platform that provides curated and interoperable data. This single-cell data resource, available via a free-to-use online data portal, hosts a growing corpus of community contributed data that spans more than 50 million unique cells.

Curated, standardized, and associated with consistent cell-level metadata, this collection of interoperable single-cell transcriptomic data is the largest of its kind.

Cells have been the focus of scientific study for centuries and represent the fundamental unit of life

Data is often difficult to access and share, with only an estimated 25% of publicly available datasets providing the cell-level metadata needed for reuse.

To address the needs for standardized, interoperable, and openly available single-cell matrices, we have developed Chan Zuckerberg CellxGene Discover (pronounced CZ CELL by GENE Discover).

Open-source and free, it includes contributions from the scientific community and is not confined to a single consortium or funder. It serves as a centralized hub that promotes collaboration across researchers, labs, and consortia. 


CellxGene serves only matrix-formatted data and metadata, which precludes the submission of raw sequence data. This allows for the open sharing of studies that may require controlled access for identifiable sequence data and enables increasingly equitable science for rapid insight into data without the immediate need for data reprocessing. 

CellxGene is comprised of tools and features designed to address the challenges of compiling and curating data from across a diverse ecosystem by developing scalable infrastructure, visualizations, and interoperability of single-cell transcriptomic data:

- Collections & Datasets: provides the ability to browse or filter individual or collections of datasets and download them with standard metadata annotations in AnnData and Seurat formats.

- Explorer: enables access to single-cell datasets through a no-code user interface so users can execute interactive analyses like differential expression or coloring groups of cells by their metadata.

- Gene Expression: An interactive tool to interrogate gene expression calculated by pooling all datasets for a cell type in any major organ of the human body.

- Census: A client library API in both R and Python, allowing researchers programmatic and efficient access to any custom slice of CellxGene data in a dataset-agnostic fashion.

A minimal cell-level schema
Metadata is critical for the reuse of data but often inconsistently captured or represented in single-cell datasets. A first key step toward ensuring greater reusability of data was defining a core set of metadata fields and ontologies. We sought to define a schema that targeted data integration.

Schema evolution is anticipated given the advancement in data generation techniques and data analysis technology, especially in a rapidly advancing scientific field like single-cell biology. We designed the minimal schema to be supportive of changes and review the data corpus every 6 months for opportunities to make it increasingly comprehensive and standardized.


Gene symbols and ontology labels are mapped consistently throughout the data corpus via a specific ontology release version defined in the schema for each community resource.

New data will require ongoing evolution of refined human cell types and tissues in a standardized, structured way by leveraging and contributing to the Cell Ontology (CL),33 Human Ancestry Ontology (HANCESTRO),34 and UBERON.35

Explorer, a feature of CellxGene, is a visualization platform that allows researchers to dynamically explore, compute, and query individual datasets for up to 4.3 million cells with minimal latency (see Methods).

Overview of Census framework.
Census is built upon the TileDB-SOMA framework to enable computational scientists to execute complex and specific queries across over 33 million cell measurements compiled from 500+ datasets spanning human and mouse organs available in CellxGene using Census. Leveraging out-of-core processing, SOMA provides the API and data model to facilitate the storage, retrieval, and analysis of over 500 datasets exceeding memory capacity. 




# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q123362109)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q123362109)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q123362109&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.10.30.563174)  

# Reading dates
  
 * 2023-11-07
