
Wikidata: A Free Collaborative Knowledgebase
============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q18507561]  
  
Publication date : 01 of October, 2014  

# Highlights

This collaboratively edited knowledgebase
provides a common source of data for
Wikipedia, and everyone else. 

Wikipedia
is committed to “a world in which every single human
being can freely share in the sum of all knowledge,” 

Wikipedia’s data is buried in 30
million Wikipedia articles in 287 languages from which extraction is inherently very difficult. 
Open editing. As in Wikipedia,
Wikidata allows every user to extend
and edit the stored information, even
without creating an account. A formbased interface makes editing easy. 

Plurality. It would be naive to expect
global agreement on the “true” data,
since many facts are disputed or simply uncertain. Wikidata allows conflicting data to coexist and provides mechanisms to organize this plurality


Secondary data. Wikidata gathers
facts published in primary sources, together with references to these sources;
for example, there is no “true population of Rome” but rather a “population
of Rome as published by the city of
Rome in 2011.” 

In spite of these differences,
SMW has had a great influence on
Wikidata, and the two projects share
code for common tasks.

A Short History of Wikidata
Wikimedia launched Wikidata in October 2012. Initially, features were limited, with editors only able to create items
and connect them to Wikipedia articles.
In January 2013, three Wikipedias—first
Hungarian, then Hebrew and Italian—
began to connect to Wikidata. Meanwhile, the Wikidata community had
already created more than three million
items. The English Wikipedia followed
in February, and all Wikipedias were
connected to Wikidata in March.

March 2013, Wikimedia introduced Lua as a scripting language for
automatically creating and enriching
parts of articles (such as the infoboxes mentioned earlier). Lua scripts can
access Wikidata, allowing Wikipedia
editors to retrieve, process, and display data. 

. We thus arrive at a model where the propertyvalue pairs assigned to items can have
additional subordinate property-value
pairs we call “qualifiers.”
Qualifiers can be used to state contextual information (such as the validity time for an assertion). They can also
be used to encode ternary relations that
elude the property-value model; for example, to say Meryl Streep played Margaret Thatcher in the movie The Iron
Lady, one could add to the item of the
movie a property “cast member” with
value “Meryl Streep” and an additional
qualifier “role = Margaret Thatcher.


Figure 2b shows the growth of Wikidata from its launch until February
2014. There were approximately 14.5
million items and 36 million language
links. 


Identifier reuse. Item IDs can be
used as language-independent identifiers to facilitate data exchange and
integration across application boundaries. Referring to Wikidata items, applications can provide unambiguous
definitions for the terms they use that
are also the entry points to a wealth of
related information. Wikidata IDs thus
resemble digital object identifiers, or
DOIs

Wikipedia is by all accounts one of
the most important websites today,
a legacy Wikidata must live up to. In
only two years, Wikidata is already
an important platform for integrating information from many sources.
In addition, it also aggregates large
amounts of incidental metadata about
its own evolution and contribution to
Wikipedia. Wikidata thus has the potential to be a major resource for both
research and development of new and
improved applications. Wikidata, the
free knowledgebase anyone can edit,
may thus bring us all one step closer
to a world that freely shares in the sum
of all knowledge




# Comments

## Tags
core for - 1.2.4. Wikidata and Knowledge Graphs

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q18507561)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18507561)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q18507561/P921%3BP4510)  
