
Relations in biomedical ontologies
==================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q19671539]  
  
Publication date : 28 of April, 2005  

# Highlights

many existing biological and medical ontologies (or'controlled vocabularies') can be improved by adopting toolsand methods that bring a greater degree of logical and onto-logical  rigor.  We  describe  one  endeavor  along  these  lines,which  is  part  of  the  current  reform  efforts  of  the  Open  Bio-medical  Ontologies  (OBO)  consortium  [1,2]  and  which  hasimplications  for  ontology  construction  in  the  life  sciencesgenerally.

 OBO's  Mouse  Anatomy  ontology,  for  example,uses just one type of edge, labeled part_of. The GO currentlyuses two, labeled is_a and part_of. The Drosophila Anatomyontology  includes  also  a  develops_from link.

 even  the  relations  is_a and part_of are  notalways  used  in  consistent  fashion  both  within  and  betweenontologies. Our task in what follows is to rectify these defects,drawing on the requirements analysis presented in [5].

OBO has now addeda  fourth  criterion  to  assist  in  achieving  such  compatibility,namely  that  the  relations  (edges)  used  to  connect  terms  inOBO  ontologies  should  be  applied  in  ways  consistent  withtheir definitions as set forth in this paper.

 To  take  just  one  example,  thepre-2004 versions of GO allowed at least three different readings.


Another  type  of  problem  turns  on  the  failure  to  distinguishrelational expressions which, though closely related in mean-ing, are revealed to be crucially distinct when explicated in theformally  precise  way  that  is  demanded  by  computer  imple-mentations. An example is provided by the simultaneous usein    OBO's    Cell    Ontology    of    both    derives_from anddevelops_from while  no  clear  distinction  is  drawn  betweenthe two [11]. This problem is resolved in the treatment of der-ivation and transformation below, and has been correspond-ingly corrected in versions 1.14 and later of the Cell Ontology.

The term 'class' here is used to refer to what is generalin reality, or in other words to what, in the knowledge-repre-sentation literature, is typically (and often somewhat confus-ingly [13]) referred to under the heading 'concept' and in theliterature of philosophical ontology under the headings 'uni-versal', 'type' or 'kind'. Biological classes are in first approxi-mation  those  classes  which  have  been  implicitly  sanctionedthrough usage of the corresponding general terms in the bio-logical literature, for example cell or fat body development

--> Good description

Thus wecannot make sense of what it means to say cell nucleuspart_of  cell  unless  we  realize  that  this  is  a  statement  to  theeffect that each instance of the class cell nucleus stands in aninstance-level  part  relation  to  some  corresponding  instanceof the class cell.

--> In other words: "(x) instance has parts of the class (y)"


When we assert that one class stands inan is_a relation to another (that is, that the first is a subtypeof  the  second),  for  example,  that  glucose  metabolism  is_acarbohydrate metabolism, then we are stating that instancesof the first class are ipso facto instances of the second

--> In wikidata, P279, subclass of

We focus here exclusively on genuinely ontological relations,which we take to mean relations that obtain between entitiesin  reality,  independently  of  our  ways  of  gaining  knowledgeabout  such  entities.

We can distinguish, in fact, the following three kinds of binaryrelations: 

`<class,   class> <instance,  class> <instance,  instance>`

The  terms  'continuant'  and  'process'  are  generalizations  ofGO's 'cellular component' and 'biological process' but appliedto entities at all levels of granularity, from molecule to wholeorganism.  Continuants  are  those  entities  which  endure,  orcontinue  to  exist,  through  time  while  undergoing  differentsorts  of  changes,  including  changes  of  place.  Processes  areentities that unfold themselves in successive temporal phases[16]. The terms 'continuant' and 'process' thus correspond towhat,  in  the  literature  of  philosophical  ontology,  are  knownrespectively  as  'things'  (objects,  endurants)  and  'occurrents'(activities,  events,  perdurants)  respectively. 


Note  that  continuants  and  processes  form  non-overlappingcategories. This means in particular that no subtype or part-hood  relations  cross  the  continuant-process  divide.

Continuants can be material (a mitochondrion, a cell, a mem-brane),  or  immaterial (a  cavity,  a  conduit,  an  orifice),  andthis, too, is an exclusive divide.


your youth and your adulthood are tempo-ral parts of that biological process which is your life.

--> instance level, nice.

We cannot, on pain of infinite regress, define all relations, andthis means that some relations must be accepted as primitive

--> Very nice set of relations.


For the typical human user of biological ontologies, however,the   listed   primitive   relations   and   associated   axioms   are designed  to  work  invisibly  behind  the  scenes.

A further constraint on the process was the goal of providinga  simple  formal  definition  for  each  included  <class-class>relation. Those relations for which an appropriate simple def-inition  could  not  be  agreed  upon  were  not  included  in  thisinterim   list.

l x, if x instance_ofA,  then  x instance_of B.  Unfortunately,  this  reading  pro-vides at best a necessary condition for the truth of A is_a B. Itfalls short of providing a sufficient condition for two reasons.The  first  is  because  it  admits  cases  of  contingent  inclusionsuch as: bacterium in 90 mm × 18 mm glass Petri dish is_abacterium, and the second is because it fails to take account of time, so that when applied to classes of continuants it yieldsfalse   positives   such   as   adult   is_a   child   (because   everyinstance of adult was at some time an instance of child).

For  simplicity  of  expression  we  shall  henceforth  write  'Cct'and 'Pp', as abbreviations for: 'c instance_of C at t ' and 'pinstance_of P ', respectively


Parthood as a relation between instances. The primi-tive  instance-level  relation  p part_of p1 is  illustrated  inassertions such as: this instance of rhodopsin mediated pho-totransduction part_of this instance of visual perception

Parthood  as  a  relation  between  classes.  To  definepart_of as a relation between classes we again need to distin-guish  the  two  cases  of  continuants  and  processes,  eventhough  the  explicit  reference  to  instants  of  time  now  fallsaway. For continuants, we have C part_of C1 if and only if anyinstance  of  C at  any  time  is  an  instance-level  part  of  someinstance  of  C1 at  that  time,  as  for  example  in:  cell  nucleuspart_ of cell


When an embryonic oenocyte (a type of insect cell) is trans-formed into a larval oenocyte, one and the same continuantentity   preserves   its   identity   while   instantiating   distinctclasses     at     distinct     times.     The     class-level     relationtransformation_of obtains between continuant classes C andC1 wherever  each  instance  of  the  class  C is such as to haveexisted at some earlier time as an instance of the distinct classC1 (see Figure 2)


C transformation_of C1 = [definition] C and C1 for all c, t, ifCct, then there is some t1 such that C1ct1, and t1 earlier t, andthere is no t2 such that Cct2 and C1ct2.That is to say, the class C is a transformation of the class C1 ifand  only  if  every  instance  c of C is  at  some  earlier  time  aninstance of C1, and there is no time at which it is an instanceof both C and C1.


Transformation,on the instance level, is just the relation of identity: each adultis identical to some child existing at some earlier time. Deri-vation  on  the  instance-level  is  a  relation  holding  betweennon-identicals.  More  precisely,  it  holds  between  distinctmaterial  continuants.


c derives_from c1 we  can  infer  that  c and c1 arenot identical and that there is some instant of time t such thatc1 exists only prior to and c only subsequent to t


erivation  as  a  relation  between  classes.  To  avoidtroubling counter-examples, the relation of derivation we areseeking on the class level must be defined in two steps. First,the class-level counterpart of the relation of derivation on theinstance   level   is   identified   as   a   relation   of   immediatederivation:
C  derives_immediately_from  C1 =  [definition]  for  all  c, t,  ifCct, then there is some c1,t1, such that: t1 earlier t and C1c1t1and c derives_from c1.


C derives_from C1 = [definition] there is some sequence C =Ck, Ck-1,  ...,  C2, C1,  such  that  for  each  Ci (1 ≤  i  <  k),  Ci+1derives_immediately_from C

DiscussionThe logic of biological relations

The  inverse  relation  for  is_a can be defined trivi-ally as follows:A has_subclass B = [definition] B is_a A.

while we have the true relational assertion human testispart_of  human  -  which  means  that  all  instances  of  humantestis are part of instances of some human - there is no corre-sponding true relational assertion linking instances of humanto instances of human testis as their parts. For these remain-ing  relations  we  need  to  work  not  with  inverses  but  ratherwith what, following GALEN, we can call reciprocal relations.

C  has_part  C1  =  [definition]  for  all  c,t,  if  Cct  then  there  issome c1 such that C1c1t and c1 part_of c at t


Note that from A part_of B we cannot infer that B has_ partA;  similarly,  from  A  has_  part  B  we  cannot  infer  that  Bpart_of   A.   Thus   cell   nucleus   part_of   cell,   but   not   cellhas_part cell nucleus; running has_ part breathing, but notbreathing part_of running.

C  integral_part_of  C1 =  [definition]  C  part_of  C1 and C1has_part C



# Comments
This is SO important. Very well written, very clear. I have to understand every word of it.



## Tags
- 1.3. Knowledge Representation in biology
- 1.3.1. OBO Foundry and biomedical ontologies

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q19671539)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q19671539)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q19671539/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q19671539&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q19671539/P921%3BP4510)  
