
The Sequence Ontology: a tool for the unification of genome annotations
=======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q21092875]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2005  

# Highlights

The Sequence Ontology (SO) is a structured controlled vocabulary for the parts of a genomic
annotation. SO provides a common set of terms and definitions that will facilitate the exchange,
analysis and management of genomic data. Because SO treats part-whole relationships rigorously,
data described with it can become substrates for automated reasoning, and instances of sequence
features described by the SO can be subjected to a group of logical operations termed extensional
mereology operators.

--> Yes, super cool

biological terminology is notoriously ambiguous; the same word is often used to describe
more than one thing and there are many dialects. For example, does a coding sequence (CDS) contain the stop codon or
is the stop codon part of the 3'-untranslated region (3' UTR)?
There really is no right or wrong answer to such questions,
but consistency is crucial when attempting to compare annotations from different sources, or even when comparing
annotations performed by the same group over an extended
period of time.

--> Nicely put.

Wherever possible, the terms used by SO to describe the parts
of an annotation are those commonly used in the genomics
community. In some cases, however, we have altered these
terms in order to render them more computer-friendly so that
users can create software classes and variables named after
them

SO is a directed acyclic graph (DAG), and can be viewed using the
editor for OBO files, OBO-Edit [11].

SO is not a database schema, nor is it a file format; it is an
ontology. As such, SO transcends any particular database
schema or file format. This means it can be used equally well
as an external data-exchange format or internally as an integral component of a database.

For example, the term CDS is defined as a contiguous RNA
sequence which begins with, and includes, a start codon and
ends with, and includes, a stop codon. According to SO, the
sequence of a three_prime_utr does not contain the
stop_codon - and files with such sequences are SO-compliant; files of three_prime_utr containing stop_codons are
not

One essential difference between a controlled vocabulary,
such as the Feature Table, and an ontology is that an ontology
is not merely a collection of predefined terms that are used to
describe data. Ontologies also formally specify the relationships between their terms.

--> Nice to separate. 

Currently, SO uses three basic kinds of relationship between
its terms: kind_of, derives_from, and part_of. These
relationships are defined in the OBO relationship types ontology [24]

kind_of relationships are synonymous with is_a
relationships. We adopted the 'kind_of' notation to avoid
the lexical confusion often encountered when describing relationships, as the phrase 'is a' is often used in conjunction with
another relationships in English - for example 'is a part_of'.

part_of relationships pertain to meronomies; that is to say
'part-whole' relationships. An exon, for example, is a part_of
a transcript

--> Part of the transcript or part of the DNA sequence that was transcribed? 

--> Or even "refers to entities which are part of entities identifiable as transcripts"?

In general, part_of relationships are transitive - an exon
is a part_of a gene, because an exon is a part_of a transcript, and a transcript is a part_of a gene

--> Gosh, that is SO confusing!

Not every chain
of part-whole relationships, however, obeys the principle of
transitivity. This is because parts can be combined to make
wholes according to different organizing principles. Winston
et al. [25] have described six different subclasses of the partwhole relationship, based on the following three properties:
configuration, whether the parts have a structural or functional role with respect to one another or the whole they form;
substance, whether the part is made of the same stuff as the
whole (homomerous or heteromerous); and invariance,
whether the part can be separated from the whole


By addressing the vague English term 'part of' in this way,
Winston et al. solve many of the problems associated with
reasoning across part_of relationships; thus, we are adopting their approach with SO. The parts contained in the
sequence ontology are mostly of the type
component_part_of such as exon is a part_of transcript,
although there are a few occurrences of member_part_of
such as read is a part_of contig.

Table 1
Six subclasses of part-whole relationships

--> That is very cool.

. Placing the biological knowledge in the ontology rather than in the software
means that the ontology and the software that uses it can be
developed, revised, and extended independently of one
another. Thus ontologies offer the bioinformatics programming community significant opportunities as regards
software design and the speed of the development cycle.

of extensional mereology (EM) operators to
ask questions about gene parts. Although new to genomics,
EM operators are well known in the field of ontology, where
they provide a basis for asking and answering questions pertaining to how parts are distributed within and among different wholes (reviewed in [26,27]).

One criticism that might be justifiably leveled against the SOand EM-based analyses presented here is that they are too
formal, and that simpler approaches could have accomplished the same ends. As our discussion of part_of relationships made clear, however, reasoning across diverse types of
parts is a complicated process; ad-hoc approaches will not
suffice where the data are complex. The more formal
approach afforded by SO means that analyses can be easily be
extended beyond the domain of transcripts and exons to
include many other gene parts and relationships as well -
including evidence

--> I am inclined to think they should be _more_ formal!
# Comments

I have not read the end carefully, but it is very interesting.


## Tags
2.1. The concept of "gene"
2.1.3. Representations of genes in knowledge bases
2.1.4.2. Gene as individual and gene as a class


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q21092875)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q21092875)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q21092875/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q21092875&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q21092875/P921%3BP4510)  
