
Towards Robot Scientists for autonomous scientific discovery.
=============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q21198755]  
  
Publication date : 04 of January, 2010  

# Highlights

We review the main components of autonomous scientific discovery, and how they lead to the concept of a Robot
Scientist.

This work has been formally recorded in great detail using logic. We
argue that the reporting of science needs to become fully formalised and that Robot Scientists can help achieve this.
This will make scientific information more reproducible and reusable, and promote the integration of computers in
scientific reasoning. We believe the greater automation of both the physical and intellectual aspects of scientific
investigations to be essential to the future of science

--> - 1.1.3. Interoperable publication processes: nanopublications 

For example, microfluidics ('lab-ona-chip') based approaches to experimentation may soon
allow small controllable biological experimental systems to
be linked to automated scientific discovery [12,13]

Computational models or simulations have been used to
give insight into how complex systems work; they represent
the current state of understanding, provide a basis for predictions, and also have the benefit of being relatively cheap
to execute. Models can be perturbed by making computational modifications to external conditions or to the architecture of the models themselves, then tested against
acquired data. Such models can be constructed manually
using human knowledge (e.g. [20]) or be automatically
derived from experimental data (e.g. [11]).
The formal recording of scientific experimental data and
meta-data can help towards creating better models, as well
as facilitating the easier reuse of that data

--> - 1.2. Formal representation of knowledge

Deduction,
induction and abduction are types of logical reasoning used
in scientific discovery [21]. Deduction enables the inference of valid facts from existing known facts and rules,
induction enables the inference of hypothesised rules from
known facts, and abduction enables the inference of
hypothesised facts from known facts.

# Comments
- 1.1.1. Literature Based Discovery, hidden knowledge and text-mining

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q21198755)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q21198755)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q21198755/P921%3BP4510)  
