
A unifying concept: the history of cell theory
==============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q22122311]  
  
Publication date : 01 of May, 1999  

# Highlights

In the same period, oval red-bloodcorpuscles were described by the Dutch nat-uralist   Jan   Swammerdam   (1637–1680),who  also  discovered  that  a  frog  embryoconsists of globular particles1

But the first description of the cell is gen-erally  attributed  to  Robert  Hooke  (1635–1702),  an  English  physicist  who  was  also  adistinguished    microscopist    (see    photo-graphs  below).  In  1665  Hooke  publishedMicrographia,   the   first   important   workdevoted  to  microscopical  observation,  andshowed  what  the  microscope  could  meanfor  naturalists.

e  described  the  micro-scopic units that made up the structure of aslice of cork and coined the term ‘‘cells’’ or‘‘pores’’  to  refer  to  these  units.  Cella  is  aLatin  word  meaning  ‘a  small  room’  andLatin-speaking   people   applied   the   wordCellulae to the six-sided cells of the honey-comb.
The  abbot  Felice  Fontana  (1730–1805)glimpsed  the  nucleus  in  epithelial  cells  in1781, but this structure had probably beenobserved  in  animal  and  plant  cells  in  thefirst  decades  of  the  eighteenth  century7.

The Scottish botanist Robert Brown (1773–1858) was the first to recognize the nucleus(a term that he introduced) as an essentialconstituent  of  living  cells  (1831)

Virchow’s  Cellularpathologiewas the most important pathogenic conceptuntil, in this century, the theory of molecu-lar pathology was developed.There was, however, a tissue that seemed tobelie cell theory  — nervous tissue. Becauseof its softness and fragility, it was difficult tohandle and susceptible to deterioration. 

The  most  important  breakthrough  inneurocytology  and  neuroanatomy  came  in1873 when Golgi developed the ‘black reac-tion’22, which he announced to a friend withthese few words, “I am delighted that I have found a new reaction to demonstrate, evento the blind, the structure of the interstitialstroma of the cerebral cortex.

 Golgi’s network theory was, however,a    substantial    step    forward    because    itemphasized, for the first time, the functionof branched axons in connecting nerve cells. 

 With the theory of evolution, the cell theoryis   the   most   important   generalization   inbiology.

 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q22122311)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q22122311)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q22122311/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q22122311&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/8964)  
