
The value of data
=================
  
  [@wikidata:Q22676713]  

# Highlights

Data citation and the derivation of semantic constructs directly from datasets have now both found their place in scientific communication. the social challenge facing us is to maintain the value of traditional narrative publications and their relationship to the datasets they report upon while at the same time developing appropriate metrics for citation of data and data constructs.

When datasets were sparse and only con-
nected to the lab that produced them, we would brood every one of them, protect (pat- ent) them and work on them in isolation in order to ‘sell’ them as chickens, usually in the form of a largely narrative article.

Now, data (eggs) have become a direct source of new in silico discoveries and a unit of scientific trade. But the scientific market has no way to value eggs because the entire system is built upon judging and exchanging chickens for acknowledgement and credit (through cita- tions and other measures of impact). 

--> Funny analogy, well done.

On the other hand, for effective and evidence-based breeding, we need the eggs as well as infor- mation from the parent chickens to assess the value of the eggs.

In this issue, Giardine et al.2 argue for “microattribution”3, providing credit for contributors and curators of entries in databases of human gene variants.

We propose a new way to represent data, information and, in particular, assertions in the form of nanopublications5

Figure 1 The current state of scholarly communication. Red ovals represent points where the current system is ‘broken’

--> Cute figure.

We needed 217 words to describe the 21 assertions in Figure 1. Please note how we introduced near-synonyms, like ‘scientific awards’ for ‘professional awards’. By using ambiguous terms and complicated sentence structure, we all contribute to ‘knowledge burying’4.

Some argue that the rhetoric in articles is difficult to mine and to represent in the machine-readable format. Agreed, but frankly, why should we try? All nanopub- lications will be linked to their supporting article by its DOI. Many conceptually unique biological assertions are repeated time and again in texts and databases. Capturing the majority of them using a variety of trusted sources is one way to collect almost all rele- vant biomedical assertions ever made and to enrich them with a dynamic evidence factor based on frequency and conditionality6. 

proper formatting and exposure of the nanopublications contained in diverse sources such as locus-specific databases could allow these resources to be recognized for the important scientific contributions they actually are. 


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q22676713)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q22676713)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q22676713/P921%3BP4510)  
