
Community next steps for making globally unique identifiers work for biocollections data
========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q22676264]  
  
Publication date : 06 of April, 2015  

# Highlights

Efforts to cross-link otherwise disconnected silos of data (Page 2008, 2009) still rely on largely imprecise points of intersection, such as text-string taxon names (as proxies for taxon concepts)

may  use  centralized (e.g., purl.org, doi.org, n2t.net)  or  decentralized  dereferencing  hosts  (e.g., an institutional site);- may support transparent identifiers (e.g., identifier strings that contain information which can  lead  to  semantic  guesses  by  humans,  such  as  collection  numbers,  collectors’  initials,  or  institutional names) or opaque identifiers, e.g. strings of letters and digits created by software (counter, UUID generator, Noid minter);

--> "opaque" identifier is an interesting name.


Providing a chain of provenance for specimens and related data is a major challenge and  has  a  set  of  roadblocks  along  multiple  dimensions.  Traditional  field  collecting  methods are ingrained in many scientists. The informatics community needs to reach out more effectively and explain to scientists the limitations of existing workflows and why an identifier scheme built around global uniqueness is not only necessary from an informatics standpoint, but would dramatically enhance the value of data for re-use, syntheses  and  analyse.


Figure 1. Example of UUIDs embedded within QR-Codes on microcentrifuge tube labels. The 5 mm × 5 mm QR-Codes (Version 2) are printed with a standard laser printer on sheets of self-adhesive 9 mm dots, and scan reliably with a standard barcode reader, while still providing room for a human-readable 5-character prefix + 5-digit number (the human-readable number and UUID are permanently cross-linked in the data management system)

--> Elaborate, but very cool.

The  key  next  step  is  to  establish  the  best  practices  to  generate  and  assign  identifiers  as they either propagate from biocollections into the literature or are created during semantically enabled publishing processes. Such practices will assure that publications follow a set of principles ratified by various stakeholders and governments, and perhaps best  described  broadly  in  the  Force11  data  citation  principles  (https://www.force11.org/datacitation), and more directly for the biodiversity community in the Bouchout Declaration  (Bouchout  Declaration  2014,  http://bouchoutdeclaration.org/)

--> cool stuff.

n some cases the answer may be a permanent single mutability policy of the identifier scheme itself, in other cases the identifier scheme may support multiple policies, and the mutability policy may be available as metadata on the identified object. We recommend using, and where necessary, developing, a vocabu-lary to document mutability policies and conventions for various content types.


Dereferencing, or the automated process that a software tool (e.g., a web browser) em-ploys to go from identifier to content or metadata access, starts with a URL. All identi-fiers, regardless of scheme, are resolved by a user agent if they are embedded in a URL. As for institutions that have long-term access in their mission, many people think that smaller, newer institutions’ website hostnames will be short-lived compared to those of older, larger institutions (e.g., loc.gov, bnf.fr). Some people prefer to trust a hostname backed by a group of institutions, even if comparatively young (e.g., dx.doi.org), rather than by any one institution. Among such group or consortial arrangements, some peo-ple prefer to trust those committed to open access (e.g., gbif.org). Persistence missions can  also  far  exceed  current  technological  solutions.  Will,  for  example,  current  http  protocols look anything like the protocols used in 2065? Forecasting about resolver persistence for 10, 20, 50, or 100 years is at best educated guesswork, but it should take  into  account  such  things  as  inevitable  technological  advances,  resolver  or-ganization’s mission, size, business model, openness, and current age.

--> Nice to think. I feel like we still be using urls in 2065.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q22676264)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q22676264)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q22676264/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q22676264&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work) 
