
Modeling sample variables with an Experimental Factor Ontology
==============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q24596875]  
  
Publication date : 15 of April, 2010  

# Highlights

We present the Experimental Factor Ontology, designed to meet cross-domain, application focused use cases for gene expression data.

Languages such as the W3C recommendation Web Ontology Language (OWL) (Horrocks et al., 2003) aid interoperability by standardizing the syntax across all domains. Advantageously, validation of this OWL representation can also be performed through the use of description logic reasoners (Sirin et al., 2007).

This includes the creation of orthogonal reference ontologies, from which classes are considered defining units of the area they describe. Although this is a worthwhile longer term aim, the state of the art is that existing ontologies are not orthogonal or interoperable, and many present a focus that is unsuitable for gene expression data.

As of November 2009, there are ∼40 000 unique annotations of sample or assay properties covering 330 species in datasets suitable for the Gene Expression Atlas.

It is clear that comparatively few terms are needed to describe the data in the Gene Expression domain and that the complexity in FMA is not needed

Our approach for the gene expression domain therefore is analogous to that of the GO (Blake and Harris, 2008), which was initially developed to describe gene products for model organism databases; it has a data-driven motivation, with ontological principles such as use of an upper level ontology applied to provide robustness and to allow interoperability with other ontologies.

EFO was developed following the ‘middle-out’ methodology first described in Uschold and Grüninger (1996) and later by (Gómez-Pérez et al., 2004). Ontologies, like software, should conform to a set of specifications and use cases, and can be tested using competency questions.

Data annotation—goal: the primary use case for this application is the annotation of transcriptomics data in the Gene Expression Atlas. Task: this is a coverage use case, i.e. can we annotate all of the data we wish to associate ontology classes with?

Query support—goal: to enable querying across hierarchies for which data exists (and is annotated). Task: enabling queries such as ‘retrieve all cell line data that is derived from epithelial tissue and are associated with cancer’.

Data visualization and exploration—goal: to present a tree structure of annotated data within Atlas. Task: presenting an ontology tree to the user to show which classes have associated data.

Data integration—goal: to allow integration of data both across experiments in Gene Expression Atlas and externally. Task: integrating with external resources that use or map to the same ontology class and compare data from these independent sources.

Data summarization and mining—goal: to obtain an analysis of samples, given common conditions of interest. Task: provide a summary for gene expression data levels for samples treated across same condition, e.g. treated with bacterial toxins.


<!-- Good outline of the different roles of an ontology -->


First, we create an annotation property, ArrayExpress_label, which we use to indicate a preferential label that is displayed in the Atlas browser which replaces any other label on the class, though such labels may also be synonyms and are supported for queries. For example, the BFO class processual entity is displayed as process in the Atlas user interface for readability. Second, we use a further annotation property organizational_class which is given a value of ‘true’ in any classes we wish to hide from the user (e.g. disposition) which are identified as structural and which are not desired to be visualized in queries.


We prefer to use OBO Foundry candidate ontologies when these provide good matches and use general uncurated resources like Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) only when necessary.

Similarly, we want a user to be able to ask for ‘forebrain’ and the query to return data that is annotated with forebrain substructures such as hypothalamus. Finally, for mouse we want to return data annotated to Mus musculus and substrains thereof.



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q24596875)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q24596875)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q24596875&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTQ099)  

# Reading dates
  
 * 2023-08-15
