
The human disease network
=========================
  
  [@wikidata:Q24678240]  

# Highlights

A network of disorders and disease genes linked by known disorder– gene associations offers a platform to explore in a single graph- theoretic framework all known phenotype and disease gene associ- ations,

--> Semi-semantic, not clear what the associations mean.

improve the single gene–single disorder approach by developing a conceptual framework to link systematically all genetic disorders (the human ‘‘disease phenome’’) with the complete list of disease genes (the ‘‘disease genome’’), resulting in a global view of the ‘‘diseasome,’’ the combined set of all known disorder/disease gene associations. The list of disorders, disease genes, and associations between them was obtained from the Online Mende- lian Inheritance in Man.

A disorder and a gene are then connected by a link if mutations in that gene are implicated in that disorder

In contrast, the obtained HDN displays many connections between both individual disorders and disorder classes.

In the DGN, two disease genes are connected if they are associated with the same disorder

If genes linked by disorder associa- tions encode proteins that interact in functionally distinguishable modules, then the proteins within such disease modules should more likely interact with one another than with other proteins. To test this hypothesis, we overlaid the DGN on a network of physical protein–protein interactions derived from high-quality systematic interactome mapping (6, 7) and literature curation (6). We found that 290 interactions overlap between the two networks, a 10-fold increase relative to random expectation (P ⬍ 10⫺6;Fig.3a).

--> That is actually not very surprising. Nice to see, but not surprising.

All together, we find 1,267 such mouse lethal orthologs ofhumangenes, ofwhich 398 are associated with human diseases, representing 22% of all known human disease genes. This allows us to distinguish between two classes of human genes: 1,267 ‘‘essential genes’’ and 1,379 ‘‘nonessential disease genes,’

--> Automatic induction of essentiality from mice to human. Not great. And how can you call an essential gene a non-disease gene? It is by definition a disease gene. 

Recent progress in genetics and genomics has led to an appreciation of the effects of gene mutations in virtually all disorders

--> Either too bold (we cannot possibly know all disorders) or too vague (inespecific effects)

Thus, although the maps shown in Fig. 2 and SI Fig. 13 will inevitably undergo local changes with the discovery of new disease genes, this will not change the overall organization and layout of the HDN significantly, because the HDN reflects the underlying cellular network-based relation- ship between genes and functional modules.

# Comments

It was a pioneer, perhaps, in its methods and visualizations. But not much new information beyond their premises. Kind of cool to show it in a summary, though, so I'll give them that. Also, it is been 13 years, and I am biased by time.