
BioNumbers--the database of key numbers in molecular and cell biology
=====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q24643881]  

# Highlights

 Contents of
the database range from cell sizes to metabolite
concentrations, from reaction rates to generation
times, from genome sizes to the number of mitochondria in a cell.

--> 1.4.4

BioNumbers was
motivated by an appreciation of how long it can take
to find even the simplest number in the vast biological literature. All numbers are taken directly from
a literature source and that reference is provided
with the number. BioNumbers is designed to be
highly searchable and queries can be performed
by keywords or browsed by menus.

Unfortunately for biologists of all stripes, finding
numbers in the vast literature can be an incredibly time
consuming and frustrating experience.

the BioNumbers database
addresses head-on the urgent need to quickly connect
researchers with numbers in molecular biology.

We do not envision BioNumbers as a one-stop destination, but rather as the first stop 
in the search for biological numbers. In some cases, numbers for specific systems have
already been compiled on-line, and BioNumbers does not
aim to replace such laudable projects. 

--> From the website:
https://bionumbers.hms.harvard.edu/bionumber.aspx?&id=103626

Number of cell types in human body
Value	200 
Almost all cell types can undergo abnormal changes in their growth that can generate tumors (neoplasms). For 210 cell types see Alberts et al., 1994 Molecular biology of the cell, 3rd edition, p.1188 top paragraph and pp.1188-9 for list. For 411 cell types see BNID 106155. For ~250 distinct cell lineages see Jackson et al., 2000 PMID 10657981 p.242 left column bottom paragraph

Numbers are often peripheral components in contemporary publications, relegated to the supplementary information because they are not central to the ‘narrative’. Therefore, although great efforts are often required to
accurately and precisely measure properties in biology,
there is generally little reward for such efforts. We therefore envision the creation of a ‘Journal of BioNumbers’
where authors could send short reports on important
numbers that they have measured,.


Most quantitative properties
in biology depend on the context or the method of measurement, the organism and the cell type


--> From the website:
https://bionumbers.hms.harvard.edu/bionumber.aspx?id=106155&ver=5

Number of cell types in normal, healthy adult
Value	411



Reference	Vickaryous MK, Hall BK. Human cell type diversity, evolution, development, and classification with special reference to cells derived from the neural crest. Biol Rev Camb Philos Soc. 2006 Aug81(3):425-55 p.441 left column 5th paragraph and pp.432-3 table 2, p.434 table 3, p.435 table 4 and p.436 table 5PubMed ID16790079

Method	Cladistic technique focusing the analysis on phenotypic characters

Comments	P.431 right column bottom paragraph: "As previous cell type inventories have generally neglected nerve cells, the tabulation of 145 neuron types (representing almost one third of the entire catalogue) is of particular significance. Amongst the diversity are 25 peripheral nervous system (enteric, motor, parasympathetic, and sympathetic) neurons, 60 special (visual) sensory neurons and 55 central nervous system neurons." See BNID 103626

# Comments

## Tags
2.4
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q24643881)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q24643881)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q24643881/P921%3BP4510)  
