
Hippocampome.org: a knowledge base of neuron types in the rodent hippocampus
============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q26253817]  

# Highlights
Hippocampome.org is a comprehensive knowledge base of neuron types in the rodent hippocampal formation (dentate gyrus, CA3, CA2, CA1, subiculum, and entorhinal cortex).

--> Archetype: rodent!

Our extensive literature mining and data reconciliation identified 122 neuron types based on neurotransmitter, axonal and dendritic patterns, synaptic specificity, electrophysiology, and molecular biomarkers. All ∼3700 annotated properties are individually supported by specific evidence (∼14,000 pieces) in peer-reviewed publications.

The lack of a complete accounting of neuron types is recognized as a critical omission for experimental and computational progress alike (Lichtman and Denk, 2011).

Our data-driven analysis of thousands of peer-reviewed publications identified a specific set of neuron properties suitable to define a basic classification scheme for collating, organizing, and integrating available knowledge.

Systematic mining of published data on axonal and dendritic profiles, augmented with information on neurotransmitter and synaptic specificity, led to the tentative definition of over 100 distinct neuron types across the hippocampal formation.

As a first step in the knowledge-base design, we sought the optimal level of description to capture the largest possible extent of available information. For example, just distinguishing neurons into projection cells and local interneurons is too coarse to reflect the known variety of hippocampal neuron types.

the binary representation (present or not) of both axons and dendrites across the 26 hippocampal parcels (see ‘Materials and methods’) is sufficient to identify >100 unique morphological profiles based on existing literature (selection in Figure 1F; complete data: hippocampome.org/morphology).

he reason is that the same name is frequently employed in the literature to describe neurons with different morphological patterns. For example, the term ‘bistratified’ has been used to describe different morphologies corresponding to Hippocampome cell types CA1 Bistratified (Freund and Buzs ´aki, 1996), CA1 Radial Trilaminar (Daw et al., 2009), and Schaffer Collateral- receiving Radiatum-targeting (Lea˜o et al., 2012). Furthermore, neurons of the same type are often given different names due to varying emphases of researchers. For instance, CA1 Radiatum cells (Cope et al., 2002) have also been called CaBP-positive non-pyramidal cells (Toth and Freund, 1992) and Schaffer collateral associated cells (Vida, 2010).

Neurons with the same axonal and dendritic patterns, but different neurotransmitters, belong to
different types. Interestingly, only one such case is known: in CA1, Cajal–Retzius cells, which were recently characterized as glutamatergic and more abundant than previously assumed in adult rats (Quattrocolo and Maccaferri, 2014), and (GABAergic) Neurogliaform cells (Price et al., 2005) have both axons and dendrites confined to SLM, though with extremely different arbor densities and shapes. Thus, putatively excitatory and inhibitory neurons in the hippocampus tend to have completely distinct morphologies. Although

The knowledge base has information on 96 biomarkers, and positive or negative expression of at least one biomarker is known for two- thirds (81/122) of the neuron types (Figure 2; extended listing: hippocampome.org/markers).

Hippocampome.org provides free, user-friendly online access to the entire information content. The annotated evidence supports 3697 distinct ‘pieces of knowledge’ (PoK) regarding the presence or absence of axons or dendrites within any of the 26 parcels (e.g., Granule cells axons are found in CA3 SL represents one PoK), the expression or non-expression of a biomarker (e.g.,Granule cells are positive for CB), and individual electrophysiological properties (e.g., the APwidth of Granule cells is 1.71 ± 0.58 ms, mean ± standard deviation).

--> PoK are nanopublication ready!

Figure 3. Flow chart of inclusion criteria for neuron types. Beginning with a reconstruction, schematic, or text description of a neuron morphology, the flow chart ends with either a new ‘on hold’ neuron type, supplemental information for an existing active neuron type, or a new active neuron type.

--> Very nice work

Hippocampome.org contains known connectivity information (synapses or lack thereof, established e.g., by electron microscopy or paired electrophysiological recordings) among its neuron types.

Hippocampome.org can deliver valuable information in many day-to-day research scenarios (Box 2) and at multiple stages of a neuroscience study (hippocampome.org/usage). They include determining whether a hippocampal neuron with a particular morphological pattern is known, obtaining a list of candidate neuron types based on partial reconstructions, and finding biomarker and electrophysi- ological properties for most neuron types.

The vision driving Hippocampome.org is a real-scale computer model of the entire hippocampal formation. Accurate simulations require knowledge of the component parts, their locations, numbers, properties, and connectivity. We have started with an accounting of the neuron types defined by their most essential morphological, molecular, and electrophysiological features. 

Hippocampome.org is well equipped to manage the expected ‘data deluge’
from ongoing big science projects (Kandel et al., 2013). With accelerating knowledge expansion, our linking protocol to interrelate each additional piece of data with pre-existing information will ensure continuous integration, facilitating user-friendly analysis and modeling. Moreover, Hippocampome. org infrastructure is designed to accommodate additions along many dimensions: new areas (e.g., septum), finer parcels (medial vs lateral EC), additional neuron types (hippocampome.org/ future), and graded reporting of neurite densities. The open-source code of this resource also encourages community-led extension to other brain regions, inter-operability with related initiatives, and progressive adoption of unique identifiers for neuron types and properties

A neuron type must satisfy four criteria to be included in Hippocampome.org. (1) The soma must
be located in the hippocampal formation. (2) The major neurotransmitter must be at least tentatively specifiable; at present, only glutamatergic and GABAergic types have qualified for inclusion in Hippocampome.org (see below for cholinergic). (3) The locations of both axons and dendrites within any of the 26 hippocampal parcels (Figure 1A,B) must be clearly presented, either textually or graphically. (4) Experimental evidence of more than a single neuron of the type must be reported

--> Slight mix of types and neurons. Types do not have somas, only the neurons described by the type.

Hippocampome.org neuron names were assigned progressing from the most to the least prominent types. When a single name is used in the literature, that name is adopted into the Hippocampome.org neuron name. For example, DG granule cells in the knowledge base are referred to as DG (e)2201p- CA3_00110 Granule, a formal name encoding the pattern of axons and dendrites (hippocampome. org/brief-interp), and Granule, a common name.

The 20 most studied biomarkers in hippocampal research (Figure 2; extended listing: hippo- campome.org/markers) were targeted for literature searches across all 122 neuron types


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q26253817)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q26253817)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q26253817/P921%3BP4510)  
