
What is the total number of protein molecules per cell volume? A call to rethink some published values
======================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q26782007]  

# Highlights

# Comments

Here, we estimate the expected total number of proteins per unit of cell volume using
known parameters related to the composition of cells such as the fraction of cell
mass that is protein, and the average protein length. Using simple arguments,
we estimate a range of 2-4 million proteins per cubic micron (i.e. 1 fL) in bacteria,
yeast, and mammalian cells. Interestingly, we find that measured values that are
reported for fission yeast and mammalian cells are often about 3-10 times lower

the explicit question of how many protein molecules are in a cell in total often baffles even experienced researchers.

Absolute values can also
serve as sanity checks on measured
reports where, for example, the number
of histones in a cell can be constrained
by the known DNA length

 Given that cell volume can change several 
fold as a consequence of growth conditions or strain identity, we choose to
discuss protein content per unit cell
volume

--> Mostly for bacteria, but also human cells (e.g. adipocytes)

H. sapiens (U2OS)

Beck et al. [11]. Range stems from the 11 most highly
abundant proteins for which the authors could not
calibrate accurately and originally reported as
>20 million copies per cell. Assuming 20 million gives the
lower value and using the original measured higher
values gives the upper bound.

H. sapiens (HeLa) 

--> Cell lines to generalize for all cases.

For mammalian cells, a value for
protein density of cp  0.2 g/mL was
reported (BNID 105938, see also [25, 26])
leading to similar estimates as for
budding yeast

Cell type characteristics can lead to
variations, but these are not expected to
lead to differences of more than twofold
except for very unique cell types. An
outlier low protein density of 60 mg/mL
has been mentioned [19] yet this is not
considered a representative value in the
literature. The calculation here does not
account for secreted proteins, which are
expected to be a small fraction in most
cell lines (some immune cells might be
notable exceptions)

Vacuoles are a significant constituent of eukaryotic cells. In some plant
cells, they can often occupy 80-90% of
the cell volume (BNID 103442, 104368)
and tend to have a lower protein
concentration.

The need to measure cell
volumes and key
physiological parameters
The values of characteristic cell parameters used here for the calculations of
protein content per cell dry mass or per
cell volume are mostly based on physiological studies from decades ago.
Probably the least robust value is that
of the protein content per cell unit
volume (usually reported in mg of
protein per mL of cell volume).


## Tags
1.4.4
2.5
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q26782007)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q26782007)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q26782007/P921%3BP4510)  
