
Representing and querying disease networks using graph databases
================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q26741378]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2016  

# Highlights

We show how graph databases are well suited for the representation ofbiological information, which is typically highly connected, semi-structured andunpredictable. We outline an application case that uses the Neo4j graph database forbuilding and querying a prototype network to provide biological context to asthmarelated genes.


Another issue is that biological data areoften semi-structured, i.e. lacking a structured data model, while still possessing somesemantic annotation.

everal graph-based approaches have been developed for biological data integrationsuch as Biozon [8], BN++ [9], Ondex [10, 11], and BioMine [12]). Some approaches, al-though providing network views, use an underlying relational database (e.g. BN++).The Ondex platform is a data warehouse using a graph data model and has been ap-plied to plant systems biology, a domain where the data is typically fragmented across alarge number of data sources and often poorly annotated. More recently, Bio4j [4] usesa graph database (Neo4j) to integrate data from several major repositories such asUniprot KB [13], Gene Ontology (GO) [14], RefSeq [15], NCBI Taxonomy [16], andExpasy Enzyme DB [17].

 Neo4j has a free community edition that can be run as a lightweight desktopdatabase as well as a database server, and an SQL-like versatile query language forgraphs called Cypher.


The diseases, as defined by the cu-rated subset of DisGeNET [20] (2014 release), were likewise represented as nodes withedges connecting them to corresponding proteins; (mapping gene names to UniProtidentifiers was done via the Restful web services API of the UniProt database).

We have extracted gene expression data fromthree asthma-related GEO studies, namely GSE27876, GSE43696 [24] and GSE63142[25]

--> It would be cool to have a graph database from all studies in the SI2 project

Here we illustrate the use of a graph database for facilitating hypothesis gener-ation on disease mechanisms

 In our view, the matter of preferencesbetween the properties databases like Neo4j or RDF triple stores comes down towhether a particular application case can actually benefit from the extra featuresavailable via Semantic Web technologies. As adopting such technologies will inevitablycome with considerable costs in terms of technical overhead and increased complexity,property databases may be preferable when speedy and flexible development of a singlenon-federated resource is the ultimate requirement.

 --> Good balance. The pros and cons for Wikidata are a bit different, I think.

 he ontologies could then provide ade-facto data modelling standard and many key concepts in the biomedical domainhave already been modelled by projects like SNOMED [31], MeSH [32], GO [33] andOBI [34], with several hundred of other more specialized ontologies available from theOBO foundry [35] and NCBO Bioportal [36] repositories.

 --> The same goes for 1.3.3. Wikidata as a platform for representation of biological knowledge


# Comments

## Tags
1.3.2.3. Bio2RDF and semantic databases
1.2.4. Wikidata and Knowledge Graphs

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q26741378)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q26741378)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q26741378/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q26741378&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q26741378/P921%3BP4510)  
