
Defining cell types and states with single-cell genomics
========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q26782737]  

# Highlights


Human bodies are said to have 210 different types of cells. However, this taxonomy is still bewilderingly diverse.

Perhaps, for example, “CD14+ monocytes” actually consist of multiple subpopulations that share CD14 expression in common. 

In 1957, C.H. Waddington proposed a powerful metaphor for how differentiated cell types emerge from a single, totipotent cell. A dynamical systems view of the cell. A cell’s state at a given time as a point in “gene regulation space.” As the cell regulates gene expression during development, it moves through the space along a trajectory. The central question posed by Waddington is: Where will the cell end up?

Stuart Kauffmann theorized that not only can cell fate transitions be described by a dynamical system, but that what we think of as distinct cell types correspond to attractors of that system (Kauffman 1993). An attractor is a location in the state space of a dynamical system that will move toward and to which it will return if perturbed.

Sui Huang showed that a simple regulatory network with just two genes that inhibit one another but promote their own expression is sufficient to generate a hypothetical landscape with three stable cell fates (Huang et al. 2007).

The cells in a single-cell RNA-seq experiment can often be represented in a space with far fewer than 30,000 dimensions: A dimension for each module of genes. If clustering single cells reveals the attractors of the cell state space, can it also be used to find transition paths between stable states?

Ultimately, most single-cell studies aim to identify and characterize the genes that determine where a cell is in the state space and drive a cell to transition from one state to another. 

Waddington was inspired by dynamical systems, which are mathematical frameworks for predicting the qualitative behavior of complex phenomena, such as the orbits of planets, over time. The
metaphor has been refined and formalized over time to explicitly
describe a cell’s state at a given time as a point in “gene regulation
space.” As the cell regulates gene expression during development,
it moves through the space along a trajectory. The shape of the trajectory is a function of (1) the cell’s starting position in the space,
and (2) the differential equations that dictate changes in the cell’s
gene expression levels that will occur at the next moment in time,
given where it currently is in the space. The central question posed
by Waddington is: Where will the cell end up?

Stuart Kauffmann theorized that not only can cell
fate transitions be described by a dynamical system, but that what
we think of as distinct cell types correspond to attractors of that system (Kauffman 1993)

Each cell captured in the experiment can be represented as a point in a high-dimensional expression space; that is, if
there are 30,000 genes in the genome, each cell is a point in a
30,000-dimensional space.

The cells in a single-cell RNA-seq experiment
can often be represented in a space with far fewer than 30,000 dimensions: We only need one dimension for each module of genes

Ultimately, most single-cell studies aim to identify and characterize the genes that determine where a cell is in the state space and
drive a cell to transition from one state to another.

For example, Buganim et al. (2012)
constructed a Bayesian network to define the hierarchy of transcriptional regulators that drive reprogramming from mouse fibroblasts to the induced pluripotent state. After reconstructing a
branched trajectory with diffusion maps, Moignard et al. (2015)
synthesized a Boolean regulatory network model to pinpoint the
genes driving the trajectory. 




# Comments
Super cool figure 1. 


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q26782737)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q26782737)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q26782737/P921%3BP4510)  
