
Transcription factors and CD4 T cells seeking identity: masters, minions, setters and spikers
=============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q26859465]  
  
Publication date : 01 of July, 2013  

# Highlights

From T helper type 1 (Th1), Th2 and Th17 cells to regulatory T (Treg) cells and follicular helper T cells, the extent to which each of these states represents lineage commitment, metastable states, sub-specialization or cells just making cytokines may appear to be an impenetrable morass.

So, when discussing issues related to cell identity, it seems logical to consider the contribution of extra-genic portions of the genome.]

 In this context, it would be logical to expect that these master regulator transcription factors determine what portion of the genome should be used in the relevant T-cell population. Strikingly though, three independent studies uncovered that this is not the case. Deletion of T-bet, retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor γt (RoRγt) and Forkhead box p3 (Foxp3) mostly led to no change in the enhancer landscape of Th1, Th17 and Treg cells.

 Many lines of evidence point to the role of Foxp3 as being necessary and sufficient for Treg-cell development,14 though the notion of a single master regulator controlling the Treg-cell phenotype has been called into question.

 Th1, Th2 and Th17 cells are the major effector cell fates attained by naive T cells. Their respective master regulators are T-bet, GATA3 and RoRγt. 

 A key aspect in the acquisition of distinct T helper cell phenotypes is the cytokine milieu. Upon encountering diverse microbial pathogens, dendritic cells and other cells of the innate and adaptive immune system produce cytokines, which serve to instruct distinct T-cell fates. 

 This interpretation does not ‘diss’ master regulators; rather, it clarifies their functions as having discrete, focused roles rather than pervasive roles in cell identity. At the same time, master regulators should not be haughty about their status and ‘diss’ the minions, when it is the latter who are doing the heavy lifting. 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q26859465)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q26859465)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q26859465&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/IMM.12113)  

# Reading dates
  
 * 2023-08-15
