
Diversity of intervertebral disc cells: phenotype and function
==============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q26823083]  
  
Publication date : 01 of December, 2012  

# Highlights

The disc is composed of different but interrelated tissues, including the central highly hydrated nucleus pulposus (NP), the surrounding elastic and fibrous annulus fibrosus (AF), and the cartilaginous endplate (CEP), which provides the connection to the vertebral bodies.

 Even though all disc cells have often been referred to as ‘intervertebral disc chondrocytes’, distinct phenotypical differences in comparison with articular chondrocytes exist and have been reported recently. 

Despite this complexity, our knowledge in IVD biology has been expanded significantly in the last decade. Cells of the IVD, which had generally been referred to as ‘chondrocyte-like’ cells or ‘IVD chondrocytes’, have been profiled and characterised in detail. Although phenotypical similarities exist between NP cells and articular chondrocytes, distinct differences have been identified (

The origin of the intervertebral disc from the notochord
The notochord provides the template for the development of the spinal segments of the disc (Peacock, 1951; Adams et al. 1990; Aguiar et al. 1999; Fleming et al. 2001; Hunter et al. 2004).

The main function of the NP is to equalise the compressive stress on the vertebral EP. In vertebrates, IVDs are subjected to complex loading mechanisms involving compression, tension, torsion, shear and fluid flow (Skaggs et al. 1994; Ebara et al. 1996; Iatridis et al. 2006).
A recent investigation demonstrated that a cell population expressing phenotypic markers of notochordal cells is also present within adult human discs (Weiler et al. 2010).

 The identification of progenitor cells and cells with a notochordal-like phenotype within human discs indicates that natural repair mechanisms exist within the disc and may be activated for regeneration, although the mechanisms and function of these cells need to be elucidated (Kim et al. 2009b).

 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q26823083)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q26823083)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q26823083&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/J.1469-7580.2012.01521.X)  
