
Toward a complete dataset of drug-drug interaction information from publicly available sources
==============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q26896954]  
  
Publication date : 01 of June, 2015  

# Highlights

This is the first study to attempt to combine all publically available PDDIs sources.

The merged dataset consists of fourteen different sources of PDDIs information.


Moreover, the combined dataset was also shown to improve the performance of an existing PDDI NLP pipeline and a recently published PDDI pharmacovigilance protocol

 Future work will focus on improvement of the methods for mapping between PDDI information sources, identifying methods to improve the use of the merged dataset in PDDI NLP algorithms, integrating high-quality PDDI information from the merged dataset into Wikidata, and making the combined dataset accessible as Semantic Web Linked Data.

 --> Nice! I imagine they stopped it, but I'll check. 

 Fig. 1. Potential drug–drug interaction information resources included in the study and an overview of the study framework.

 --> missed a table

 We acquired all publicly available PDDI datasets identified by the aforementioned search and then designed a simple PDDI data model

 Drug entities in each dataset were mapped to DrugBank identifiers [17] wherever possible to enable cross-dataset comparisons

 The drug product label, also known as a “package insert” in the United States (US) and the summary of product characteristics in Europe, is a document required by law, written for clinicians and patients containing information on the drug by the drug manufacturers.

 Our systematic search identified 14 publicly available sources of PDDIs (Table 1).


Another interesting direction of future work is the improvement of drug interaction information in Wikipedia by adding expert-vetted PDDI data to Wikidata [47]. Wikipedia is easily accessible, routinely used by clinicians for finding medical information [48] and could play a significant role in global health promotion [49]. However, the quality of information on Wikipedia was found to be lower than in some proprietary resources [50]. Wikidata is a recent addition to the Wikipedia infrastructure, providing an open, efficient database for serving content to Wikipedia in different languages. We are working on integrating high-quality PDDI information to Wikidata and currently finishing the evaluation of a prototype for making these data available in Wikipedia.

As future work, we plan to improve the mapping mechanisms and integrate high-quality PDDI information in the merged dataset to Wikidata and make it available for a broader community of stakeholders. Another future work is to make the combined dataset accessible to humans and computer programs as Semantic Web Linked Data.

--> Not sure if it worked. It is used only 1,818	times on Wikidata. 



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q26896954)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q26896954)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q26896954&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JBI.2015.04.006)  
