
Userscripts for the life sciences
=================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q27062487]  

# Highlights

Several userscripts are presented that enrich biology and chemistry related web resources by incorporating or linking to other computational or data sources on the web. The scripts make use of Greasemonkey-like plugins for web browsers and are written in JavaScript.

Information from third-party resources are extracted using open Application Programming Interfaces, while common Universal Resource Locator schemes are used to make deep links to related information in that external resource.

Userscripts are small programs that can alter the HTML content rendered by web browsers.

--> Hmm, that is a nice option for Ann: an Userscript that highlight Wikipedia links in a text.

For example, userscripts have been used in bioinformatics to enhance the iHOP web page [5]: the script extracts user assigned tags from a third party resource, and shows them as a tag cloud on iHOP pages for particular genes

n addition to the unique identifier, one additional func- tionality is needed to create a link to a particular database: the database must provide either an API (Application Pro- gramming Interface) which can be queried using the iden- tifier or else provide a uniform scheme for deep linking to a web page containing information about the entry behind the identifier
A summary of the resources and identifiers used by userscripts for the life sciences

Microformats [20] are a lightweight specification that extends HTML to add semantic markup to web pages.

Compared to the Postgenomic website, the Chemical blogspace site also identifies molecules referenced in blogs either by micro- format markup of InChI and SMILES, or by analysing links to Wikipedia [28]. If the latter link points to a wiki page that contains a PubChem compound identifier or an InChI, then the molecular structure is linked to the blog post.

Here we have focused on the development of userscripts that enhance web pages for biologists and chemists. If all of these userscripts are installed, any web page with a PDB code will now contain a link to view the structure in 3D.




# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q27062487)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q27062487)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q27062487/P921%3BP4510)  
