
Adult mouse cortical cell taxonomy revealed by single cell transcriptomics
==========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q27311570]  

# Highlights

We identified 49 transcriptomic cell types, including 23 GABAergic, 19 glutamatergic and 7 non-neuronal types. We also analyzed cell type–specific mRNA processing and characterized genetic access to these transcriptomic types by many transgenic Cre lines.

Cell types can be preferentially associated with molecular markers that underlie their unique structural, physiological and functional properties, and these markers have been used for cell classification.

The annotated data set and a single-cell gene expression visualization tool are freely accessible via the Allen Brain Atlas data portal (http://casestudies.brain-map.org/celltax).

Cell-type identification

--> Even though they use the word "identification", they mix classification (as in creation of classes) and identification (assignment of classes to individuals) concepts throughout the text.


To access both abundant and rare cell types in VISp, we selected a set of transgenic mouse lines in which Cre recombinase is expressed in specific subsets of cortical cells.

Fig 1. Each type is represented by a color bar with the name and number of core cells representing that type. The violin plots represent distribution of mRNA expression on a linear scale, adjusted for each gene (maximum RPKM on the right), for major known marker genes: Snap25 (pan-neuronal); Gad1 (pan-GABAergic); Vip, Sst and Pvalb (GABAergic); Slc17a7 (pan-glutamatergic); Rorb (mostly L4 and L5a); Foxp2 (L6); Aqp4 (astrocytes); Pdgfra (oligodendrocyte precursor cells, OPCs); Mog (oligodendrocytes); Itgam (microglia); Flt1 (endothelial cells); and Bgn (smooth muscle cells, SMC).

Fig 2. Cre line specificity characterized by transcriptomic cell types (N = 1,424 core cells, 255 intermediate cells). The size of each black disk represents the proportion of cells classified as core in each transcriptomic type isolated from a particular Cre line and
microdissection combination (rows).
all but one Cre line (Chat-IRES-Cre) labeled more than one transcriptomic cell type.
--> Nice mapping of genetically-defined to cluster-based cell types. Clearly, there is correspondence, but it is not a perfect match.



most layer-specific Cre lines labeled specific types of glutamatergic neurons.

--> I wonder how much strain-to-strain bias (Cre-independent, I mean) may affect the classification.

For each type, if available, we defined ‘unique markers’, which are genes expressed only in that type among all of the cells sampled. We also identified ‘combinatorial markers’, which are differentially expressed genes not restricted to a single cell type.


we integrated our data into constellation diagrams that summarize the identity, select marker genes and putative location of these types along the pia-to–white-matter axis (Fig. 4a–c).

This mode of presentation paints the overall phenotypic landscape of cortical cell types as a combination of continuity and discreteness: the presence of a large number of intermediate cells between a particular pair of core types suggests a phenotypic continuum, whereas a lack of intermediate cells connecting one type to others suggests its more dis- crete character.


Figure 4 Cell types summary and relationships.

We identified 18 transcriptomic cell types belonging to three previously described major classes of GABAergic cells named after the corresponding markers Vip (vasoactive intestinal peptide), Pvalb (parvalbumin) and Sst (somatostatin)6,23,24


Beyond the major types, correspondence of our transcriptomic types to those previously described in the literature was not straight- forward and relied on the existence of a Rosetta stone: a shared reagent, feature or molecular marker with unambiguous translational power. Potential inferences on correspondence to previously proposed types were further complicated by previous studies’ employment of a variety of animal models, at varying ages, and with focus on different cortical areas

For glutamatergic cells, we identified six major classes of transcriptomic types—L2/3, L4, L5a, L5b, L6a and L6b—on the basis of the layer-specific expression of marker genes and layer-enriching dissections; this is consistent with many previous studies1

To assess the correspondence between the transcriptomic cell types and axonal projection patterns, we combined single cell RNA-sequencing with viral retrograde tracing using canine adenovi- rus expressing Cre recombinase (CAV-Cre) in the Cre-reporter Ai14 mice (Fig. 6a)

Figure 6 Transcriptomic signatures and axonal projections. (a) Schematic of experimental approach. CAV-Cre was injected into two different VISp projection areas in Ai14 mice: ipsilateral visual thalamus (LGd/LP) or contralateral visual cortex (VISp). TdT+ single cells were isolated from VISp by microdissection and FACS. Examples of fresh brain slices from injected animals are presented below. Inj, injection site; IT, injection tract; D, microdissected tissue used for preparation of single-cell suspension and FACS. Single-cell transcriptomes were obtained and used to classify the corresponding cells by the random forest approach (Online Methods) to our previously determined transcriptomic cell types

--> Nice!

The discovery of new marker genes (Fig. 3) enables generation of new specific Cre lines (Fig. 7) and provides guidance for intersectional transgenic strategies (such as the one in Supplementary Fig. 1a) to enable specific access to cortical cell types that do not express unique marker genes

Our results suggest many new directions for further investigation.
At the forefront is the question of the correspondence and potential causal relationships between transcriptomic signatures and specific morphological, physiological and functional properties.

Are certain transcriptomic differences representative of cell state or activity, rather than cell type? In fact, is there a clear distinction between the state and the type? For example, recent evidence suggests that Pvalb basket cells acquire specific firing properties in an activity-dependent manner that may result in a continuum of basket cell phenotypes33, perhaps mirroring the large numbers of intermediate cells that we found for upper layer Etv1(Er81)-positive Pvalb cells (Fig. 4a). Although these questions await further studies, our approach provides an overview of adult cell types in a well-defined cortical area based on a highly mul- tidimensional data set and is an essential step toward understanding the most complex animal organ, the mammalian brain.
# Comments

Once more representing cell-types as single-inheritance trees.

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q27311570)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q27311570)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q27311570/P921%3BP4510)  
