
BioGPS and MyGene.info: organizing online, gene-centric information
===================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q27575818]  

# Highlights

BioGPS (http://biogps.org) was created as a centralized gene portal for aggregating distributed gene anno- tation resources, emphasizing community extensi- bility and user customizability. BioGPS serves as a convenient tool for users to access known gene-centric resources, as well as a mechanism to discover new resources that were previously unknown to the user


--> Site is still up, super cool old school style.

While the breadth of available gene annotation re-
sources is impressive and valuable, the fragmentation of this landscape of tools significantly impedes scientific research.

We created BioGPS to simplify navigating the land-
scape of gene annotation resources. Originally published in 2009 (6), BioGPS promotes two key principles: commu- nity extensibility and user customizability.


As we illustrated in our previous paper (6), the landscape of online gene annotation resources can be accurately described as a ‘Long Tail’. While there are a few sites that generate a huge amount of content and value (e.g. NCBI, Ensembl, UniProt, etc.), there are a large number of smaller resources that each produce a smaller amount of specialized content. In aggregate, this Long Tail of gene-centric resources comprises an essential source of content for a complete understanding of gene function.

Organizing data from Long Tail resources represents a significant challenge. BioGPS addresses this challenge using crowdsourcing by enabling our user community to directly contribute to our library of Long Tail resources. In BioGPS, we use the concept of a plugin to represent each individual resource. Each BioGPS plugin is primarily defined by the URL template that includes a variable placeholder for a gene-specific identifier (e.g. NCBI Gene, Ensembl Gene, Refseq, Symbol, etc.). BioGPS cur- rently supports more than 30 commonly used identifiers. When a user views a gene report within BioGPS, the iden- tifiers corresponding to that gene are combined with a plugin’s URL template to create a resolved URL

BioGPS usage is measured using Google Analytics and
our internal logging systems. Each month, we currently average more than 155 000 page views from ?13 500 unique users.

--> Super cool.

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q27575818)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q27575818)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q27575818/P921%3BP4510)  
