
The automation of science.
==========================
  
  [@wikidata:Q27937312]  
  
Publication date : 01 of April, 2009  

# Highlights
The basis of science is the hypothetico-deductive method and the recording of experiments in
sufficient detail to enable reproducibility. We report the development of Robot Scientist “Adam,”
which advances the automation of both. Adam has autonomously generated functional genomics
hypotheses about the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and experimentally tested these hypotheses
by using laboratory automation. We have confirmed Adam’s conclusions through manual
experiments. To describe Adam’s research, we have developed an ontology and logical language.
The resulting formalization involves over 10,000 different research units in a nested treelike
structure, 10 levels deep, that relates the 6.6 million biomass measurements to their logical
description. This formalization describes how a machine contributed to scientific knowledge.

This growth in scientific data,
in turn, requires the increased use of computers
for analysis and modeling. The use of computers
is also changing the way that science is described
and reported. Scientific knowledge is best expressed in formal logical languages (3)

Only formal languages provide sufficient semantic
clarity to ensure reproducibility and the free
exchange of scientific knowledge. Despite the
advantages of logic, most scientific knowledge is
expressed only in natural languages. This is now
changing through developments such as the
Semantic Web (4) and ontologies (5).

--> Direct quote in 1.2


With robot scientists, comprehensive metadata are produced
as a natural by-product of the way they work.
Because the experiments are conceived and executed automatically by computer, it is possible
to completely capture and digitally curate all aspects of the scientific process (11, 12).

To set up Adam for this application required 
(i) a comprehensive logical model encoding knowledge of S. cerevisiae metabolism
(ii) a general bioinformatic database of
genes and proteins involved in metabolism; 
(iii) software to abduce hypotheses about the genes
encoding the orphan enzyme
(iv) software to deduce experiments that test the observational consequences of
hypotheses (based on the model); 
(v) software to plan and design the experiments
(vi) laboratory automation software to physically
execute the experimental plan and to record the
data and metadata in a relational database;
(vii) software to analyze the data and metadata (generate growth curves and extract parameters); and
(viii) software to relate the analyzed data to the hypotheses;


Use of a robot scientist enables all aspects of a
scientific investigation to be formalized in logic.
For the core organization of this formalization,
we used the ontology of scientific experiments:
EXPO (11, 12). This ontology formalizes generic
knowledge about experiments. For Adam, we
developed LABORS, a customized version of
EXPO, expressed in the description logic language OWL-DL (17). Application of LABORS
produces experimental descriptions in the logic
programming language Datalog (18)

--> 1.3

It could be argued that the scientific knowledge “discovered” by Adam is implicit in the
formulation of the problem and is therefore not
novel. This argument that computers cannot
originate anything is known as Lady Lovelace’s
objection (20): “The Analytical Engine has no
pretensions to originate anything. It can do
whatever we know how to order it to perform”
(her italics). We accept that the knowledge
automatically generated by Adam is of a modest
kind. However, this knowledge is not trivial, and
in the case of the genes encoding 2A2OA, it
sheds light on, and perhaps solves, a 50-year-old
puzzle (21).

--> 1.1.1

We have shown that a
simple form of hypothesis-led discovery can be
automated. What remain to be determined are the
limits of automation.
# Comments

## Tags
1.1
1.2.1
1.3.1

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q27937312)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q27937312)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q27937312/P921%3BP4510)  
