
Monoallelic expression of olfactory receptors
=============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28080586]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2015  

# Highlights
The olfactory GPCRs belong to several different families: the olfactory receptors (ORs), trace amine–associated receptors (TAARs), type-1
and type-2 vomeronasal receptors (V1Rs and V2Rs), and, in rodents, the formyl peptide receptors (FPRs). In mice, these four families include more than 2,000 receptor genes. Although several hundred of these genes are nonfunctional pseudogenes, at least 1,300 code for full-length receptors
(Clowney et al. 2011, Ishii & Mombaerts 2011, Liberles & Buck 2006, Rodriguez et al. 2002).


Odorant–OR pairing is combinatorial: each odorant activates multiple ORs, and higher concentrations of an odorant activate additional ORs (Malnic et al. 1999, McClintock et al. 2014, Nara et al. 2011). Most ORs appear to be tuned toward speciﬁc odorants, or odorants with a speciﬁc physicochemical feature,
but some ORs are broadly tuned and recognize many, structurally diverse odorants (Grosmaitre et al. 2009, Nara et al. 2011).

There are two subfamilies of ORs: 160 type I ORs that are related to ORs found in ﬁsh and other
vertebrates, and 1,271 mammal-speciﬁc type II ORs.

As described in the section Olfactory Receptor Choice Deﬁnes Olfactory Sensory Neuron Identity, each OSN expresses only one allele of one OR. Singular expression was originally proposed based on transcript cloning experiments performed on small pools of OSNs (Chess et al. 1994).

The promoter of olfactory receptor 151 (Olfr151) contains both O/E and homeodomain sites, and deleting these sites reduces the expression of
Olfr151 transgenes (Rothman et al. 2005).

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28080586)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28080586)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q28080586&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1146/ANNUREV-CELLBIO-100814-125308)  
