# The top 100 papers
    [@wikidata:Q28250597]

## Highlights
it takes a staggering 12,119 citations to rank in the top 100 — and that many of the world’s most famous papers do not make the cut.

The most cited work in history, for example, is a 1951 paper2 describing an assay to determine the amount of protein in a solution.

Another common practice in science ensures that truly foundational discoveries — Einstein’s special theory of relativity, for instance — get fewer citations than they might deserve: they are so important that they quickly enter the textbooks

For decades, the top-100 list has been dominated by protein biochemistry.

So popular is BLAST that versions8, 9 of the program feature twice on the list, at spots 12 and 14.

But owing to the vagaries of citation habits, BLAST has been bumped down the list by Clustal, a complementary programme for aligning multiple sequences at once

Number 41 on the list is a description13 of how to apply statistics to phylogenies. In 1984, evolutionary biologist Joe Felsenstein of the University of Washington in Seattle adapted a statistical tool known as the bootstrap to infer the accuracy of different parts of an evolutionary tree.

The Kaplan–Meier paper was a sleeper hit, receiving almost no citations until computing power boomed in the 1970s, making the methods accessible to non-specialists.

 at number 59, Israeli statisticians Yoav Benjamini and Yosef Hochberg’s 1995 paper19 on controlling the false-discovery rate is ideally suited for data coming from fields such as genomics or neuroscience imaging

 “We often cite these kinds of papers almost without thinking about it,” says Paul Fossati, one of Grimes’s research colleagues. The same could be said for many of the methods and databases in the top 100

 
## Comments
I wonder what changes we had in the past 6 years.