
Metabolic stability and epigenesis in randomly constructed genetic nets
=======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28256189]  
  
Publication date : 01 of March, 1969  

# Highlights
 studying the behavior of large, randomly con- structed nets of these binary “genes”. The results suggest that, if each “gene” is directly affected by two or three other “genes”, then such random nets: behave with great order and stability; undergo behavior cycles whose length predicts cell replication time as a function of the number of genes per cell; possess different modes of behavior whose number per net predicts roughly the number of cell types in an organism as a function of its number of genes; and under the stimulus of noise are capable of differentiating directly from any mode of behavior to at most a few other modes of behavior.

 ary device, able only to be on or off. The most fundamental of measures is the binary category scale. Use of these simplest devices facilitates study of the behavior of truly complex nets; the behavior of randomly connected, but then fixed, nets of binary components should provide a reliable guide to the behavior of similar systems whose components’ behavior are described by continuous or probabilistic functions; synthesis of mRNA  is, in fact, probably an all or none binary process; the number of repressor molecules per gene is thought to be less than about 12 (Bretscher, 1967), therefore it seems preferable to treat the activity of a gene as a discrete, not continuous, function of its input. 

 --> 0.1 fcoex & FCBF

 Nets are randomly constructed in two distinct senses. The K inputs to each gene are chosen randomly; to each gene one of the 22K Boolean functions of its K inputs is assigned randomly. After being assembled, these nets are deterministic. We assume that all genes compute one step in one clocked time unit. Such a genetic net is a finite sequential atuomation, a machine with a finite number of states and a function mapping each state into a subsequent state (see Fig. 2). A state of the net is described by a row  which lists the present value, 1 or 0, of each of the N elements of the net. Each gene can be inde- pendently on or off, thus there are just 2N distinct states of a net of N binary elements.

e principles underlying cellular differentiation remain among the most enigmatic in biology. We are required to explain the spontaneous generation of a multiplicity of cell types from the single zygote, to deduce a natural tendency of a system to become increasingly heterogeneous, then to stop differentiating. Among the important characteristics of cell differentiation are: initiation of change; stabilization of change after cessation of stimulus; the efficacy of many substances, exogenous and endogenous, as inductive stimuli; a limit of five or six as the number of cell types which may differentiate directly from any cell type; progressive limitation in the number of developmental path- ways open to any small region of the embryo; restricted periods during which a cell is competent to respond to an inductive stimulus; the discreteness of cell types, that is, the mutually exclusive constellations of properties by which cells differ; a requirement for a minimal and preferably heterogeneous cell mass to initiate differentiation in many instances, and to maintain it in some; the occurrence of metaplasia between undifferentiated cell types, or from an undifferentiated type to a specialized type, but the lack of metaplasia (the isolation) between specialized cell types; and the cessation of differentia- tion (Grobstein, 1959). I believe many aspec


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28256189)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28256189)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28256189/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q28256189&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28256189/P921%3BP4510)  
