
The language of gene ontology: a Zipf's law analysis
====================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28268340]  

# Highlights

Texts written in natural language show a statistical power law behaviour, Zipf’s law, the exponent of which can provide useful information on the nature of the language being used. We have therefore explored the hypothesis that collections of GO annotations will show similar statistical behaviours to natural language

Annotations from the Gene Ontology Annotation project were found to follow Zipf’s law. Surprisingly, the measured power law exponents were consistently different between annotation captured using the three GO sub-ontologies in the corpora

The power of the GO annotation is that it allows unambiguous com- munication of knowledge among biologists as to the functionality of gene products, at the same time as mak- ing the biological knowledge computer-comprehensible


--> "Unambiguous" is a bit too strong, but surely less ambiguous.

There is some evidence that sources annotated through manual curation are of higher quality than those anno- tated automatically [10]

Zipf further argued that the power law behaviour arose from a principle of “least effort” in communication. A communication process can be thought of as having three components; a speaker, a listener and a message. The principle of “least effort” examines the work required from the speaker and the listener in com- municating a message [12,24]. Similarly, we can view annotation as a process of communication.

The simplest annotation for the speaker (annotator) to pro-
duce is a frequently used (and ambiguous) term such as “cell” (GO:0002623). Such an annotation would, how- ever, push greater effort on to the person using the an- notation – the listener. The listener’s job is easiest if the term used is clear and unambiguous, for example “integ- rin complex” (GO:0008305). This, however, requires sig- nificant effort from the speaker in identifying such rarely used GO terms.

Gene Ontology identifiers and evidence codes were retrieved from each of the genome projects covered by the Gene Ontology Annotation (GOA) project.

Some of the most frequently used terms in the annota- tion data are some of the most generic (low term depth).

For example, we have observed a real and significant difference in the power law exponents measured for annotation using the that using the molecular function and cellular compo- biological process sub-ontology (β?2.1) compared with nent sub-ontologies (β?1.8)


An unexpected finding is that the power law exponent of data described using the process sub- ontology is significantly different to that measured for data in the function and component ontologies. We do not know whether this difference is some fundamental feature of the structure of the GO sub-ontologies, the nature of the biology being communicated, or whether it reflects thought processes in the annotation teams. Such an understanding could be useful in helping improve the use of ontologies for annotation.
# Comments

I can do some of these statistics in my "deep annotations"

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28268340)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28268340)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28268340/P921%3BP4510)  
