
Master transcription factors determine cell-type-specific responses to TGF-β signaling
======================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28586183]  
  
Publication date : 01 of October, 2011  

# Highlights

We conclude that
cell-type-specific master transcription factors determine the genes bound by Smad2/3 and are thus
responsible for orchestrating the cell-type-specific
effects of TGF-b signaling.

Signaling pathways are required throughout development
and play essential roles in numerous disease processes. It is
notable that any one signaling pathway can direct very different responses in different cell types

--> 1.4.4. Types of knowledge about cell types

Although human and murine (m) ESCs respond differently to
TGF-b signaling (James et al., 2005), both cell types require
the master transcription factor Oct4 to maintain cell identity
(Chambers and Smith, 2004), so we investigated whether
Smad3 also co-occupies sites with Oct4 in mESCs.

--> Species-neutral gene

If Smad3 is recruited to DNA sites by master transcription
factors, then we would expect Smad3 sites in each cell type to
be occupied by the master transcription factor found in that cell
type. We initially analyzed the top 1000 bound sites for Smad3
in mESCs, myotubes, and pro-B cells and asked whether those
sites were occupied by master transcription factors (Figures 4C
and S3A). Indeed, Oct4 occupied sites with Smad3 in mESCs
but did not occupy sites bound by Smad3 in myotubes or
pro-B cells. Myod1 occupied sites with Smad3 in myotubes,
and PU.1 occupied sites with Smad3 in pro-B cells. We next
analyzed all Smad3 sites in each cell type, which confirmed
that Smad3 tends to co-occupy sites with the cell-type-specific
master transcription factors (Figure S3B).

--> Abundance bias? 

. Smad3 Can Bind the Same Gene at
Different Sites in Different Cell Types
(A) Smad3 binds a small number of genes in common
between different cell types. The Venn diagram shows the
overlap of genes bound by Smad3 in mESCs, myotubes,
and pro-B cells (Table S3).

Our findings reveal that the cell-type-specific effects of TGF-b signaling
are determined in large part by the interaction of Smad2/3
proteins with master transcription factors that specify and maintain cell identity. It is through this mechanism that TGF-b signaling is tailored to modulate genes that are most relevant to cell identity, which may explain why aberrations in this pathway
can have such profound effects in a range of human diseases.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28586183)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28586183)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28586183/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q28586183&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28586183/P921%3BP4510)  
