
CLO: The cell line ontology
===========================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28650204]  

# Highlights

Collaboration among the CLO, CL, and OBI has established consensus definitions of cell line-specific terms such as ‘cell line’, ‘cell line cell’, ‘cell line culturing’,and ‘mortal’ vs. ‘immortal cell line cell’.A cell line is a genetically stable cultured cell population that contains individual cell line cells.

The hierarchical structure of the CLO is built based on the hierarchy of the in vivo cell types defined in CL and tissue types (from which cell line cells are derived) defined in the UBERON cross-species anatomy ontology.

Due in large part to a history of bottom-up naming practices, cell line nomenclature has not been standardized or controlled by any centralized authority.
As we move toward the establishment of a centralized resource for cell lines, the ambiguity of cell line-associated terms needs to be clarified.

The CLO was originally presented in the International Conference on Biomedical Ontology (ICBO) in 2011.

As part of the CLO refactoring process, a working group was established between members of several key open biomedical ontologies where cell line-related entities are represented, including the Cell Ontology (CL) and the Ontology for Biomedical Investigation.

CL as a home for high-level in vitro cell modelling (e.g. cultured cell), the CLO as a home for more specific cell line cell and cell line classes, and the OBI as a home for experimental entities related to these cell lines (e.g. cell line culture and establishing cell line classes).

A _cell line_ is defined as a genetically stable and homogenous population of cultured cells that shares a common propagation history (i.e. has been successively passaged together in culture).

A _cell line cell_ is defined simply as a cultured cell that is part of a cell line.

A _clonal cell line_ is defined as a cell line that derives from a single cell that is expanded in culture.

A _cell line culture_ represents an actual physical culture of cell line cells that is an input to experimental processes.

A cell line is supplied, maintained, or catalogued by a specific organization such as American Type Cell Culture (ATCC) that ‘has cell line repository role’.

The hierarchical structure of cell line cells in the CLO is built up primarily based on three criteria: in vivo cell type, in vivo tissue types, and organism species, from which cell line cells are derived.

HeLa cell (Figure 3B):
'derives from' some ('epithelial cell' and ('is part of' some ('uterine cervix' and ('is part of' some 'Homo sapiens')))) 

Given the usage of cell lines in microarray studies, the development of a com- prehensive cell line cell ontology is needed to support for efficient query of functional genomics studies.
The recent development of the Cell Culture Ontology (CCONT) has resulted in an ontology with overlapping cell line information to CLO [20].


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28650204)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28650204)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28650204/P921%3BP4510)  
