
The Confidence Information Ontology: a step towards a standard for asserting confidence in annotations
======================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28647782]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2015  

# Highlights

eeded  at  a  workshop  during  the  Biocuration  2012  conference,  a  workinggroup has been created to address this problem. We present here the elements that were identified  as  essential  for  assessing  confidence  in  annotations,  as  well  as  a  draftontology—the Confidence Information Ontology—to illustrate how the problems identi-fied could be addressed. We hope that this effort will provide a home for discussing thismajor issue among the biocuration community.

The type of evidence used to support the assignment ofan annotation is often used as a proxy for judging its qual-ity, in large part owing to the extensive use of the evidenceontology (ECO) (

For  example,  ‘microarray  evidence’  (ECO:0000058)may report results from a high quality experiment with sev-eral biological replicates, or from a single low quality ex-perimen

In  order  to  demonstrate  how  such  an  ontology  couldaddress the need for a standard method to provide confi-dence  information,  we  present  here  a  new  ontology  thatwe have developed: the CIO 

Three CIO terms corresponding to basic levels of confi-dence have been defined in the ontology: ‘low confidencefrom  single  evidence,  medium  confidence  from  singleevidence,   and   high   confidence   from   single   evidence

Another  consensual  point  was  that  different,  non  redun-dant,  experimental  or  computational  methods  provide  astronger support for an annotation. For this reason, we cre-ated  the  terms  ‘confidence  statement  from  multiple  evi-dence lines of same type’ and ‘confidence statement frommultiple evidence lines of multiple types’ (Figure 1), whereevidence type corresponds to any evidence term in ECO

When evidence  lines are contradictory, we  can distin-guish  ‘weak’  contradictions  (e.g.  a  single  low-confidenceevidence  contradicting  several  high-confidence  evidencelines), from ‘strong’ contradictions (e.g. several high-qual-ity evidence lines, all contradictory

An example of use can be found in the annotation of hom-ology  between  anatomical  entities,  provided  by  the  Bgeeteam  (see  https://github.com/BgeeDB/anatomical-similar-ity-annotations/wiki/Similarity-annotations).

We  created  the  CIO  in  order  to  illustrate  these  prin-ciples. We hope it might be a trigger for the biocurationcommunity  to  address  this  need  for  standardizing  confi-dence   information.   Whether   this   ontology   undergoesmajor changes in the near future, following feedback fromthe community, or whether it is used ‘as is’ by several re-sources,  we  hope  that  annotation  confidence  will  be  in-creasingly available in biocuration efforts.

# Comments

Advanced level of annotation. Quite cool.

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28647782)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28647782)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28647782/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q28647782&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/DATABASE/BAV043)  
