
How to describe a new fungal species
====================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28730060]  
  
Publication date : 01 of December, 2010  

# Highlights

The  formal  requirements  and  best  practices  for  the  publication of descriptions of new fungal species are discussed. Expectations for DNA sequences  and  cultures  are  considered.  A  model  manuscript  offers  one possible approach to writing such a paper.

There  are  no  formal  standards  for  the description  and  illustration  of  species,  but  there  are some  formal  (or  ‘legal’)  requirements  for  proposing names that are imposed by the International Code of Botanical  Nomenclature  (ICBN;  McNeill et al. 2006). 

The ICBN is  updated  every  six  years,  after  each  International Botanical  Congress,  and  is  available  on  the  World Wide  Web  (see  references).

In  taxonomic language, species must be ‘effectively’, ‘legitimately’ and ‘validly’ published. These three words have  special  meanings  in  taxonomic  terminology  (as do ‘illegitimate’ and ‘invalid’), and they should not be used in other ways in taxonomic manuscripts.

1.   To  be effectively published  (Arts.  29–31),  i.e.  to be made available, a description of a new species must  be  published  in  a  journal  that  can  be  read by  the  scientific  community.

2.  To  be legitimately  published  (Art.  6),  i.e.  legally acceptable,  a  new  species  must  have  a  unique binomial,  i.e.  it  cannot  have  the  same  species epithet as another species validly published in the same genus.

--> As there is no naming standards, there are no formal naming requirements.

3.  To be validly published (Arts 32–45), a new species must be clearly designated as a new species, have a Latin diagnosis, and a single, clearly designated and  permanently  preserved  ‘type’,  which  fixes the  application  of  the  name. 

--> Can we have this notion of a "type specimen" for a cell type?? It could be a digital representative sample, either a picture or something, alongside its description.
--> The "Latin diagnosis" can be adapted.

 Living cultures are now allowed as holotypes (Art. 8.4), but only if they are preserved in a metabolically inactive state (i.e. by lyophilization or in liquid nitrogen


NF orm  Al requIremeNtsTo  successfully  describe  a  new  species,  the  author must  convince  readers  (especially  reviewers  and editors) that:

1.   The species is really undescribed
3.   The  species  is  described,  illustrated  or  otherwise characterized  adequately  so  that  it  can  be recognized again by subsequent workers.
4.   A sufficient number of cultures or specimens were examined. Ideally, new species should be described based on more than one specimen or culture, and some  journals  demand  this. 


At present, there are no formal requirements that you must  have  cultures  or  DNA  sequences  of  a  fungus before you can describe a new species. Nevertheless, DNA sequences and cultures significantly enhance the value  of  a  species  description  and  you  should  make every effort to generate these resources.

Usually the Introduction concludes with a statement like, “therefore, we decided that our fungus represents an  undescribed  species,  which  is  described  and illustrated here as Genus species sp. nov.”

--> A paper dedicated "just" to a cell type might be too much. But a standard supplementary file could be enough.

Isolation methodsExplain  all  isolation  methods  used,  such  as  explants from sporophores or infected host tissues, removal of spores  directly  from  sporulating  structures

tAX oNom Y
Genus species Authors1, sp. nov. 
MycoBank: MBxxxxxxx.
Figs xxx–xxx
The  Latin  diagnosis  comes  first  and  is  essential  for valid publication. It should list the diagnostic characters only, i.e. those that separate it from similar ones, and not be a complete translation of the description. Many journals  now  restrict  the  Latin  to  a  few  lines.  Use published Latin diagnoses for models, then if possible have  yours  checked  by  a  mycologist  or  botanist competent in scientific Latin. If there is no such expert in  your  own  department,  consult  with  colleagues  in other institutions. Stearn’s Botanical Latin (1992) is a valuable resource for preparing Latin diagnoses.

If  you  have  done  any  physiological  tests,  or determined cardinal temperatures, this information is normally put in a separate paragraph in the description. It can also be put into a table or in a graph, which may be easier for a reader to follow.

Additional  material  examined:  Most  journals  have a  specific  format  for  this  part  of  the  paper.  For  all specimens  and  cultures,  including  isotypes  and  ex-type  cultures,  list  Country:  Province/State/Territory/ County/Township,  City/Town/Park,  Specific  location details (GPS coordinates, including altitude), Substrate or host, Date of collection and/or isolation, Collector’s name, Collector’s number (if any), Herbarium or culture collection  abbreviations  and  accession  numbers where  the  material  is  preserved.

The ICBN does not require that new species descriptions have  illustrations  (Fig.  1),  but  few  journals  allow the  description  of  a  new  species  without  them,  with the  exception  of  yeast

In addition to the usual acknowledgements for a scientific paper (e.g. mentors, sources of funding), it is traditional to  acknowledge  any  taxonomic  specialists  that  you have consulted during your decision to describe a new species. 


# Comments

## Tags
--> description of new fungal species; very useful general guidelines 3.10 Minimal Information About New Cell Classes

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28730060)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28730060)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28730060/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q28730060&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.5598/IMAFUNGUS.2010.01.02.02)  
