
An ontological approach to describing neurons and their relationships
=====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28730328]  

# Highlights

Since Cajal, the neuron remains a fundamental unit of the nervous system, yet even with the explosion of information technology, we still have few comprehensive or systematic strategies for aggregating cell-level knowledge. Progress toward this goal is hampered by the multiplicity of names for cells and by lack of a consensus on the criteria for defining neuron types.

A scalable repository of neuron types will provide researchers with a resource that materially contributes to the advancement of neuroscience.

there are relatively few clearly identified cell classes; rather the literature is rife with partially overlapping or irreconcilable classification schemes publishedfor aparticularbrain region andusually basedon a single technique.

The granularity of the description must be chosen carefully. Using too large a number of properties to maximize the resolution of neuron types might produce so many types as to hinder the understanding of basic mechanisms and common principles. Conversely, using too small a number of properties, while still possibly capturing substan- tive information, could potentially yield such general categories as to miss essential functional and computational consequences ofneuronal diversity.

Ontologies are formal representations of domain knowledge leveraging normalized logical relationships (Larson and Martone, 2009). In recent years, ontological characterization has emerged as a promising mechanism to describe biological systems.

We will use the terms “feature” and “property” interchangeably to signify descriptors ofneuronal phenotypes.

Ramon y Cajal’s great work on the histology ofthe nervous sys- tem (Cajal, 1911). His classification scheme was primarily based on the output connectivity, but this logic was not reflected in the terminology. Nevertheless, the names stuck, and people simply proceeded with their studies using the terms they preferred. The same lack of rules for a systematic terminology continues through the present day to hinder the inventorying of cells.

From a modern biological perspective, it is likely that neu-
ronal classification will ultimately be based on, or at least relate to, developmental ontogeny (Wonders and Anderson, 2006).

--> I wonder if that is still true 14 years in the future (i.e. in 2020)

What properties should be used to define neuron types? The
most desirable categorization would be maximally informative of how each neuron type relates to others in the context ofneuronal processing. 

Most introductory text books provide an overview ofthese classification systems: bymor- phology, e.g., pyramidal or bipolar; by functional role (excitatory vs. inhibitory); by neurotransmitter(s) released; by physiological characteristics (fast-spiking, adapting, etc.,) and by the range of their connectivity (i.e., local circuit or projection neuron). Combining these dimensions yields a combinatorial subdi-
vision, with the danger of becoming lost in the detail while missing the context of overall function. Some

The advantage of a semantically consistent and formal rep-
resentation of neuronal properties is the ability to automatically generate additional classifications of neurons through any single or multiple set of properties.

The NIF project has taken steps toward providing the basic relations and entities for establishing a common neuronal knowledge base through the establishment of the NeuroLex (http://neurolex.org), a wiki facil- itating the establishment of a lexicon of neuroscience concepts

--> Neurolex is still up, but now redirects to interlex.org, which redirects to https://scicrunch.org/scicrunch/interlex/dashboard 

The NeuroLex also selected several key properties that are useful for the classification of neuron types (e.g., their neurotrans- mitter), leading to the ability to infer broad classes such as
“GABAergic neurons.

. It is also planned to pro- vide a SPARQL endpoint and RESTful web services for direct queries and data pulls from the Neuron Registry.

--> Nice.

Dropdown lists of terms help guide the curator by facilitating the adoption of structured vocabularies (Figure 6). To enter additional information, such as a new part value, a simple “other” option can be selected, which invokes an intuitive entry form. Thus, task force members can use the existing ontological descriptors or adapt and enhance the ontology to incrementally evolve the descriptive framework. Using this approach, freeform descriptions of neuron types
as typically reported in the scientific literature can be effi- ciently converted into a triple form of that same neuron type.

FIGURE 7 | Mapping of a freeform neuronal description of the defining properties of an Olfactory bulb (main) mitral cell into a part-relation-value ontological description.

Usage examples of the machine-readable information beingentered into this Neuron Registry include searches of neurons based on properties (e.g., what neurons have axons located in a given region?), finding similarities and differences between two
specific cell types (i.e., common and distinguishing properties), and checking to determine if a neuron with a given set of properties has already been characterized or might constitute a new type.

Each neuron type in the Neuron Registry is defined by a collection of prop- erties, each expressed with a relation and a value referring to a specific neuron part. For example, one of the properties defining dentate gyrus granule cells is that their dendrites are in the molec- ular layer of the dentate gyrus.

The defining properties are all necessary conditions for a neu-
ron to be considered of a given type. This means that if a neuron is known or shown not to have one of these necessary properties, then it is a different type altogether. Taken together, the collec- tion of properties, which defines a neuron type, also constitutes a set of sufficient conditions for a neuron to be of that type. This means that if a neuron has all of those properties, then it must be of that type. The adoption of “necessary and sufficient” properties is opposed to a “comprehensive description” of neu- ron types. The Neuron Registry aims at a minimal description of neuron types, in the sense ofonly including definitional informa- tion, rather than being generically descriptive. As such, there is no restriction on the range of neural property descriptors as long as the “necessary and sufficient” criterion is met.

--> Nice!! That is exactly what I aim at.

In general, it is not required to show that a neuron has all of the properties defining a given type, in order to conclude that it is of that type. Usually, only a subset of the defining properties is observed in a given lab, time period, and research project. However, stating that a neuron belongs to a given type assumes that all of the defining properties would be verified if they were measured.

--> Yes! This assumptions could be made explicit, and then it would be nicely coherent.

Any cell with all of these features is a “typical pyramidal neuron.” However, several
“atypical or aberrant pyramidal neurons” also exist, sharing most but not all features with their typical counterparts, such as aspiny pyramids and inverted pyramids (Nieuwenhuys, 1994). Because they lack at least one of the necessary defining properties, these other cell types constitute separate classes.

Last but not least, every assignment of a defining property to aneuron typemust beaccompanied byat least onecitationof a peer-reviewed publication. Multiple citations may be necessary to properly attribute the source of information about particular neuronal properties.

we have ini- tiated an Adopt-a-Neuron Campaign (adopt.a.neuron@incf.org) encouraging (self-)nomination of neuroscience experts to curate the properties of their specific neuron(s) of interest. A paral- lel Representation and Deployment Task Force (RDTF) is envi- sioned to support the activity of the Neuron Registry by ensuring that the relations linking the ontological classes and the values of instances are compliant with rigorous ontological principles (http://obofoundry.org). This separate curation step removes the necessity for the neuroscience experts to also possess and respect formal ontology expertise while trying to resolve open questions and/or integrate existing knowledge about neuron types. The end result will also be ready for incorporation into broader cell ontology efforts (http://cellontology.org).

--> Cool! I wonder where Wikidata may join the effort.

Each neuron type in the Neuron Registry and in the NeuroLex is associated with a unique identifier (i.e., a code or string of char- acters not associated with a different type). The unique identifier is not to be confused with the common name ofthe neuron. Each neuron type is also given a preferred name and possibly one or more synonyms.

The confusion ofmixing neuron names from different regions
is striking even for just two regions, compared with the ease of scanning and finding a specific name when structured by region.

In spite of these challenges, the utility of this approach has been tested on over 200 neuron types in the NeuroLex (available at http://neurolex.org/wiki/Category:Neuron), and provides the basis for future naming.

In the genomic world, every sequence is registered within a standard format to a cen- tral database where it can be compared algorithmically to all other sequences. We do not have the luxury at the cellular level of a simple set of characters for defining neurons. However, having a standard grammar and centralized database where neu- ron descriptions can be deposited in a way that is amenable to machine-based processing and where unique identifiers can be assigned will be an important infrastructure for finally grappling with the cellular complexity of the nervous system.

Ontologies provide a flexible character- ization method that can be adapted to the resolution of choice to maximize resultant utility by neuroscientists toward advance- ment of their research.

The approach described here is just in its infancy. It will take a concerted effort by teams of researchers throughout the neuro- science community to address all of the possible neuron types. TheNeuron Registry task force will help defineand refinethis approach, and will hopefully catalyze a spiraling effort to encom- pass a wider and wider degree of community participation.
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28730328)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28730328)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28730328/P921%3BP4510)  
