
How the gene ontology evolves
=============================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28740788]  
  
Publication date : 05 of August, 2011  

# Highlights
This paper illustrates how these processes are
carried out, by studying the ways in which curators at the Gene Ontology have hitherto incorporated new
knowledge into their resource.

This study illustrates the difficulties involved in applying general standards to the development of a
specific ontology. Ontology curation aims to produce a faithful representation of knowledge domains as they keep
developing, which requires the translation of general guidelines into specific representations of reality and an
understanding of how scientific knowledge is produced and constantly updated. In this context, it is important
that trained curators with technical expertise in the scientific field(s) in question are involved in supervising
ontology shifts and identifying inaccuracies.

This paper
aims to provide biologists who are not normally
involved in the development of ontologies with an
understanding of the amount of conceptual and practi-
cal effort needed in this area, as well as the expertise
involved.

Ontology shift 1: Dealing with anomalies
One type of ontology shift occurs when curators become
aware of a mismatch between GO representation and
reality, leading to a term being incorrectly related to
other terms in the ontology.

A second type of ontology shift occurs when GO needs
to be extended to cover terminology and data coming
from new research fields, biological issues or species.

Ontology shift 3: Dealing with diverging definitions
across communities
A third type of ontology shift results from the need to
deal with diverging definitions across research commu-
nities. Often, given the diversity and fragmentation typi-
cal of biological and biomedical research, the same
phrase is used in different ways depending on the
research context [3].

Discussion
Like other ontologies in OBO, GO can be used as a plat-
form for data sharing only insofar as it accurately captures
current biological knowledge. GO terms are expected to
refer to real biological entities and processes, and thus the
definitions and relations used to characterise these terms
need to reflect established knowledge about those entities
and processes


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28740788)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28740788)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q28740788&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-12-325)  
