
Knowledge networks in the age of the Semantic Web
=================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q28842577]  

# Highlights

Web-based communities will be one of the earlier beneficiaries of the emerging Semantic Web. With the new standards and technologies of the Semantic Web, effective utilization of knowledge networks will expand profoundly, fostering new levels of innovation and knowledge

The proper creation and use ofknowledge can help fill various innovation gaps in healthcare and pharmaceutics, finding more optimal solutions for medical and industrial processes and thereby reducing inefficiencies in systems that burden our society.

communities of practices, especially in the life sciences, rely on what their members identify are common ideas, leading them to define what the core concepts and premises are.

The collective knowl- edge can only be utilized if they are sufficiently described using a common basis of meanings or semantics held by the community’s members, such as what is meant be effective and supported as in: ‘Treatment ofParkinson’sDisease by L-DOPA is noteffective,therefore Stem Cell research needs to be supported ’. 

Communities of practice can become formalized
and transform into consortia and alliances, but not every communities of practice necessarily needs to become formalized. Many continue to serve impor- tant functions as informal communities.

Wenger [5] describes this process as ‘Negotiation of Meaning’; the production of meanings ‘that extend, redirect, dismiss, reinterpret, modify or confirm ... the histories of meanings of which they are a part’.

Negotiation of Meaning is the process by which
semantic meaning is established in a given domain, resulting in the common usage of terms and ideas by the community to further explore new ideas

As Moen [6] exclaims: ‘Within a community or domain, relative homogeneity reduces interoperability challenges. Heterogeneity increases as one moves outside of a focal commu- nity/domain, and interoperability is likely [to be] more costly and difficult to achieve.’ This speaks directly to all web-based assets (see further) and sources of data, and why a term like skin rash can either mean general red bumps on the skin or something more specific (seborrheic dermatitis) depending on the clinician. The direct consequence is that there can never be an over-arching semantic model that will work for all individuals (or even across all biology). Rather there will be a distributed network of many semantic constructs that may occasionally overlap each other on common agreed points (e.g. ‘all organisms containasetofinherited genes’)

the entire group knows at once that all deducible knowledge on a common subject is deducible by all the members, and that even this fact is also commonly known. This establishes a criterion for group identity (weall knowthis) and helps them realize what they can do together (we know what knowledge can be leveraged)

In the biomedical ecosystem, it is broadly recognized that isolated groups or ‘knowledge silos’ will not be successful or innovative, as compared to those groups that share knowledge. In science, there is a strong requirement to be ‘boundaryless’ [7] while still retaining the values that adhere to more local community structures, such as identification with colleagues close by and an esprit-de-corps that should not be overlooked.

Knowledge is closely linked to emotions (see Descartes’ Error by Damasio [8]) and emotions are more likely to be reinforced locally.

Tags are usually not part of controlled vocabularies, but are simple forms that can be created, shared and re-used as ad hoc ‘categories for bookmarks’, similar to keywords. They are dynamic and local, and form what have been termed folksonomies: a basis of simple vocabularies that arise within a given community.

The web is not just about data and documents; it’s mainly about people putting their assets on the web and being acknowledged for it.

nterestingly, the original tools written for the web by Tim Berners Lee allowed direct editing of HTML pages via a combination browser-editor; wikis are a curious retrograde shift using another intermediate form.

Contrary to many opinions [13], the Semantic Web vision for the most part is really about a large, distributed collection of bottom-up semantic definitions, driven autono- mously by individual communities.

By choosing to represent scientific information (‘the BRCA1 gene contributes to incidences of Breast Cancer’), processes (‘Radiation therapy can reduce Liver Tumor growth’), and policies (‘Menover50should be routinely screened for Prostate Cancer’) using ontologies, many functions ofbiomedical research communities can be normalized and optimized. We do not go as far to suggest that (all) community knowledge can itself be represented formally; more appropriately it is a means to embed concise, discoverable markers (defined as part of Negotiation of Meaning) into additional knowledge artifacts (published papers and data sets)

The key issue here remains: how do these formal structures come about in early stages of the community life cycle?

Knowledge networks require the convergence of three areas: communities of practice, knowledge assets, and technology.
? Social dynamics and the desire for recognition are the main drivers for generating successful knowledge networks.
? The Semantic Web paradigmwill prove its utility by supporting knowledge communities.
References

r
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q28842577)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q28842577)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q28842577/P921%3BP4510)  
