# Ten simple rules for better figures
    [@wikidata:Q28974693]

## Highlights
Identify, as early as possible in the design process, the audience and the message the visual is to convey.
Student audiences require special care since the goal for that situation is to explain a concept
Each type of support medium requires a different figure, and you should abandon the practice of extracting a figure from your article to be put, as is, in your oral presentation.
 If the numeric values are important, they must be provided elsewhere in your article or be written very clearly on the figure. Similarly, if there is a point of interest in the figure (critical domain, specific point, etc.), make sure it is visually distinct 

All plots require at least some manual tuning of the different settings to better express the message

--> Challenge: find papers that use the default plots

Sequential: one variation of a unique color, used for quantitative data varying from low to high.
Diverging: variation from one color to another, used to highlight deviation from a median value.
Qualitative: rapid variation of colors, used mainly for discrete or categorical data.

Figure 6. Do not mislead the reader.

On the left part of the figure, we represented a series of four values: 30, 20, 15, 10. On the upper left part, we used the disc area to represent the value, while in the bottom part we used the disc radius. Results are visually very different

“Regardless of the cause, it is all non-data-ink or redundant data-ink, and it is often chartjunk.” Thus, in order to avoid chartjunk, try to save ink, or electrons in the computing era

the frontiers between data visualization, infographics, design, and art are becoming thinner and thinner

Remember, in science, message and readability of the figure is the most important aspect while beauty is only an option, as dramatically shown in Figure 8.

## Comments
- I like the plot on figure 1
- https://github.com/rougier/ten-rules/blob/master/figure-1.py