
Reflect: A practical approach to web semantics
==============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q30002409]  
  
Publication date : 01 of July, 2010  

# Highlights
To date, adding semantic capabilities to web content usually requires considerable server-side reengineering, thus only a tiny fraction of all web content currently has semantic annotations. Recently,
we announced Reflect (http://reflect.ws), a free service that takes a more practical approach: Reflect
uses augmented browsing to allow end-users to add systematic semantic annotations to any web-page
in real-time, typically within seconds.


--> Website is old school, but still up.

 Reflect was first-prize winner out of over 70 submissions in the Elsevier Grand Challenge, an international competition for systems that improve the way scientific information is communicated and used.


A common situation facing anyone reading text on a web-page
is coming across names or concepts and wanting to know more
details. In some cases, the reader wants only to quickly check the
definition of the name or concept, whereas in other cases, the reader
would like to navigate to other web-pages showing more detailed
information about the name or concept.
Currently, faced with this situation, a reader typically executes
the workflow: copy, paste, and Google.

Fig. 1. Example of augmented browsing with Reflect. A web-page is shown before (left) and after (right) it has been augmented or modified by clicking on the Reflect button,
a plug-in available for Firefox or Internet Explorer. Reflect tags the names of small molecules, genes, and proteins but otherwise leaves the web-page unchanged. Clicking
on a tagged name (e.g., ‘aspirin’, right image) opens a popup giving access to more detailed information (e.g., the 2D structure of aspirin), without needing to navigate away
from the current web-page.

--> Cool, similar to SciLite

 Another tool,
Concept Web Linker (http://tinyurl.com/conceptweblinker) tags a
broader range of bio-entities, again requiring about a minute to
tag one page. The Concept Web Linker popups show less specific information, and to reach more specific information, such as
protein sequences, the user needs to navigate through a series of
web-pages, in some cases browsing complex ontologies

We recently published a brief announcement of the Reflect service [7], a new, free community resource that combines real-time
tagging with augmented browsing


Tagging requests are managed by a daemon thread with a single hash containing the complete lexicon. The daemon can accept
documents in HTML or text format, and also a URL, in which case
the document is fetched by the Reflect server. The daemon does
a two-pass scan of each document, first to find organism names
(needed to map protein names to a specific protein entity), then
a second pass to tag all terms in the document that match entries
in the Reflect lexicon. 



# Comments

## Tags
1.2.2. Computational ontologies and their methods

1.2.3. Web of Data and Linked Open Data
3.2. Community annotation of texts via Wikidata

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q30002409)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q30002409)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q30002409/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Reflect%3A%20A%20practical%20approach%20to%20web%20semantics'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
