
Community annotation and bioinformatics workforce development in concert--Little Skate Genome Annotation Workshops and Jamborees.
=================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q30427789]  
  
Publication date : 20 of March, 2012  

# Highlights
The North East Bioinformatics Collaborative(NEBC) is undertaking the genome sequencing and annotation of the little skate (Leucoraja erinacea) to promote advance-ment of bioinformatics infrastructure in our region, with an emphasis on practical education to create a critical mass ofinformatically savvy life scientists

Acting as anexus for both curation activities and dissemination of project data, a project web portal, SkateBase (http://skatebase.org)has been developed

Little skate (L. erinacea) as a model organismLittle skate (L. erinacea) is one of 11 non-mammalian or-ganisms selected for genome sequencing by an NIHNational  Human  Genome  Research  Institute  advisorypanel because the skate shares characteristics with thehuman  immune,  circulatory  and  nervous  systems.

v) sequence annotation by participating groups from allfive states using a bioinformatics analysis framework de-veloped at UD; (vi)


There are several layers of annotation that can beapplied to a genome. The initial phase involves identifica-tion of genome features, such as open reading frames(ORFs), tRNA, rRNA, other non-coding RNA, regulatorysequence motifs, etc. Next automated annotation pipelineswill apply tools such as BLAST and HMMER to identifyputative features based on sequence homology to otherbetter-characterized organisms. The manual curation thatfollows will verify, modify and/or expand upon automatedannotations at both gene and protein levels to providequality annotations for the genome. 

Three face-to-facegenome annotation workshops were organized, with theaim of developing a knowledgeable workforce in thecutting-edge genomic and bioinformatic sciences, and tofoster data-intensive collaborative research across theregion  (http://bioinformatics.udel.edu/research/skategen-omeproject). A timeline of the annotation workshops andgenome-sequencing progress is shown in Figure 2. These1-week-long workshops were held in Delaware and Maineand were attended by participants from all five NECCstates.

Annotationactivities paring experts and non-experts (or senior andjunior participants) in small groups have facilitated activelearning via peer mentoring.

For example theactivities have suggested that incorporation of the annota-tion assignments into educational curricula across institu-tions can be an effective means for obtaining qualityannotations through semester-long or academic year-longtraining and assessments.

--> Nice.

# Comments

## Tags
3.2.2. Community curation and gamified science


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q30427789)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q30427789)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q30427789/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q30427789&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
