
Reconstruction of the mouse otocyst and early neuroblast lineage at single-cell resolution
==========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q30580416]  
  
Publication date : 24 of April, 2014  

# Highlights
Here, we conducted highly parallel quantitative
RT-PCR measurements on 382 individual cells from
the developing otocyst and neuroblast lineages to
assay 96 genes representing established otic
marker

In this study, we use the otocyst, the precursor of the vertebrate
inner ear, as a model system to explore quantitative single-cell
transcriptional characterizationfor 96 genes at the spatial, temporal, and functional level.

(D) PCA of 382 cells projected onto the first two components.

--> Pre-tSNE era! - 1.4.2.2.2. Visualization of scRNAseq data

(C) Genes that delineate each bicluster are listed. Expression of colored markers is shown in (D) at single-cell resolution.

Neuroblasts express a number of hallmark genes,
such as Neurog1 (Ma et al., 1998), Neurod1 (Liu et al., 2000),
and Isl1 (Li et al., 2004).

The B2-characterizing marker lunatic fringe is expressed in
about 59% of cells in B2


. Finally, B6 cells represent a distinct subpopulation of Wnt active cells
that exclusively coexpress the endolymphatic duct marker
Wnt2b and newly identified Wnt7a, but not Wnt7b, and are
also positive for Emx2, which previously was not detectable in
the otocyst by in situ hybridization (Holley et al., 2010) (Figures
2D and S5F).


In summary, biclustering analysis revealed different subpopulations within the otocyst and neuroblast cells

Single-cell quantitative RT-PCR is a rapidly evolving method that
bears promise to benefit many aspects of biology and medicine
(Kalisky and Quake, 2011). 

--> Stanford dudes

er. The association of the first principal component with temporal changes allowed
us to study this transition on a one-dimensional principal component vector.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q30580416)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q30580416)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q30580416&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2014.03.036)  
