
Publishing DisGeNET as nanopublications
=======================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q31194033]  

# Highlights

The manual curation of facts from published scientific papers is slow and inefficient, and therefore new approaches are needed that can enable the automatic, scalable and reliable extraction of assertions.

Here, we address these issues and describe our efforts to represent the DisGeNET database of human gene-disease associations as permanent, immutable, and provenance rich digital objects called nanopublications.

DisGeNET GDAs as a new linked RDF dataset using the emerging nanopublication approach3
and the Trusty URI technique [23].

A nanopublication is formally defined using Semantic Web standards - the W3C’s Resource Description Framework (RDF) and the Web Ontology Language (OWL) - and the nanopublication schema.
Specifically, it consists of three named RDF graphs (excluding the head graph) representing the assertion, its
provenance and metadata about nanopublication itself using resolvable Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs).

DisGeNET GDA content is extracted from various types of sources ranging from structured databases on human and animal models to unstructured scientific literature. 

The RDF representation identifies genes by their NCBI Gene ID and diseases by their UMLS Concept Unique Identifier (CUI), and captures the biological type of the association.

DisGeNET nanopublications consist of four named graphs: head, assertion, provenance and publication information.


- The head graph defines the structure of the nanopublication by linking to the other nanopublication graph URIs. 
- The assertion graph contains the description for a specific single GDA assertion. 
- The provenance graph includes provenance, evidence and attribution statements that were directly mapped from the VoID description
of the RDF dataset. 
- Finally, the publication information graph includes all the metadata information regarding the nanopublication itself

To represent provenance information we mainly used the PROV Ontology (PROV-O).

The assertion graph states the gene and the disease involved in the association, each identified by existing well-defined URIs.

We are planning to use the ConceptWiki 18 to add URLs to the DisGeNET evidence concepts.

With the aim to show the questions that can be answered by our nanopublication implementation, we use the following question as an example: What are the proteins (and their protein interactions) associated to Prostatic Neoplasms with curated evidence? The query in Figure 2 illustrates how to retrieve this information.

A variety of datasets represented as nanopublications have recently been published.

The Repurposing Drugs with Semantics (ReDrugS) framework [12], based on a systems biology approach, represents biological and chemical entity interactions contained in databases as nanopublications.
# Comments
