
The bacterial species definition in the genomic era.
====================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q33261434]  

# Highlights
The bacterial species definition, despite its eminent practical significance for identification, diagnosis, quarantine and diversity surveys, remains a very difficult issue to advance. Genomics now offers novel insights into intra-species diversity and the potential for emergence of a more soundly based system.

Our analysis offive important bacterial groups suggests, however, that more stringent standards for species may be justifiable when a solid understanding of gene content and ecological distinctiveness becomes available

Our analysis also reveals what is actually encompassed in a species according to the current standards, in terms of whole-genome sequence and gene-content diversity, and shows that this does not correspond to coherent clusters for the environmental Burkholderia and Shewanella genera examined

the idea of biologically meaningful clusters of diversity that applies to most eukaryotes may not be universally applicable in the microbial world, or if such clusters exist, they may be found at different levels of distinction

Bacterial species are typically demarcated based on a combination of more than one criteria (Vandamme et al. 1996; Stackebrandt et al. 2002), with the criterion proposed by Wayne et al. being by far the most influential one and the reference point for the development of new standards for species. This criterion considers a species to be essentially a collection of strains that are characterized by at least one diagnostic phenotypic trait and whose purified DNA molecules show at least 70% cross-hybridization (DNA–DNA hybridization or DDH; Wayne et al. 1987).

Only about 4500 bacterial species have been described to date (after removing the 1200 synonyms; Garrity et al. 2004), which contrasts to well over 1 million eukaryotic species, and yet bacteria have been exploring evolutionary adaptations much longer than eukaryotes.

the 70% DDH criterion is quite valuable as a first standard approximation for species since it encom- passes relatively homogeneous sets of strains which share at least 80% of their genes with a function other than hypothetical or mobile. The question then becomes whether the up to 20% difference in genes with well-recognizable functions is a large enough difference to justify description of further taxonomic subdivisions (more species?) within species.

We believe that if the purpose of the species is to be soundly predictive of the phenotypic potential of a strain (as the greater public assumes it to be), then the 70% DDH standard appears too liberal.

Precisely how large a difference in gene content has to be present between two strains before they could be described as separate species, however, would always be an ambiguous question, particularly if the strains were not separated by a substantial genetic distance.

A strong, linear correlation is observed between the amount of DNA that differs and evolutionary distance over the total evolutionary range covered by the five groups considered (figure 1a)

--> But that is kind of circular, isn't it?

Our comparisons revealed another important trend: the groups that have larger genomes (Burkholderia and E. coli) tend to show larger intra-species genomic differences than groups that have smaller genome sizes (Streptococci and Staphylococci ).

--> Do cell types that express more genes have more intra-type variability? Maybe that is also circular.

In conclusion, some, even substantial, gene-content
differences may be observable within currently named species and this might continue to be the case even if more stringent standards for species are adopted. The importance of these genes for splitting a species, however, should be determined by evaluating their ecological and phenotypic potential for the organism as well as potential genetic discontinuity between strains of the species (see also clusters in §3).

Although the ecotype is not recognized as an official rank of bacterial taxonomy (Brenner et al. 2000), the concept of ecotype is important for microevolutionary studies because it describes a collection of strains that shows some level of ecological distinctiveness within its species (Schloter et al. 2000; Cohan 2001). In other words, ecotypes preserve the full, or nearly full, phenotypic and ecological potential that characterizes the species and are able to exploit only a slightly different ecological niche.


An important issue that remains unresolved is whether bacteria exhibit a genetic continuum in nature, which is not supportive of a transparent species definition, or whether there are coherent sequence/genomic clusters, as are evident for most eukaryotic organisms.

Bacterial (or archaeal) species living in isolated, hyperthermal lakes such as Sulfolobus spp. (Papke et al. 2003; Whitaker et al. 2003) may be examples of this kind. In contrast, environments like soil, with great complexity, mixing and slow growth rates (Grey & Williams 1971), which would facilitate mixing of populations before the divergence of populations takes place, may support a continuum of diversity.

--> Kind of interesting. I wonder if there are parallels to be traced to the evolution of cell types.

4. IMPLICATIONS FOR THE SPECIES CONCEPT The species concept is the theoretical framework that attempts to describe what bacterial species are and explain how they are formed; the species definition is how the concept is exercised in practice. Therefore, advancing the species concept is essential for a better species definition. The present working hypothesis for the bacterial species concept is that bacteria form coherent genomic clusters that are characterized by distinctive phenotypic properties

. The clusters are thought to be created as the effect of two major forces, selection and recombination (geographical isolation, which has also been advocated as cohesive force for speciation was previously mentioned). The most favourable species concepts for bacteria presently in practice, the biological (Mayr 1997)and the phylogenetic (Hull 1997) concepts (the recently proposed ecotype concept (Cohan 2002) can be seen as a variation of the phylogenetic concept), are essentially based on the differential weighting of the importance of these processes

--> Nice that there are organized discussions.

For these reasons, the current species definition appears more pragmatic and operational than a definition that attempts to materialize the current, limited knowledge about selection and recombination.

Despite the very attractive attempts to reconcile the eukaryotic and bacterial species under the same biological species concept or its variations (Templeton 1989; Hull 1997), we believe that bacteria exhibit biology which is too different compared with eukaryotic organisms, even the asexual ones, for this to be fruitful.

--> Yeah, but the concept of cell type is much closer.

Another major conclusion from the results presented here (e.g. figure 1) is that, even with the whole genomic sequences available, the decision when to split species to produce more species, or what are the boundaries between a species and its ecotypes, may not always be unequivocal.

Our initial analysis of a small number of published DDH values among strains whose genomic sequences have become available revealed that the 70% DDH standard corresponds tightly to approximately 95% average nucleotide identity (ANI; Konstantinidis & Tiedje 2005)

The fact that ANI is, first, a simple, robust and pragmatic measure for all bacteria at the species level and probably up to the family level, and second, that it overcomes many of the limitations of traditional methods greatly magnifies its importance and potential for such finer-scale systematic studies.

--> That definition allows for partially overlapping species in a continuum.
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q33261434)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q33261434)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q33261434/P921%3BP4510)  
