
Strategic reading, ontologies, and the future of scientific publishing.
=======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q33493284]  
  
Publication date : 01 of August, 2009  

# Highlights

 An observed recent increase
in strategic reading in the online environment will soon be further intensified by two current
trends: (i) the widespread use of digital indexing, retrieval, and navigation resources and (ii) the
emergence within many scientific disciplines of interoperable ontologies. Accelerated and
enhanced by reading tools that take advantage of ontologies, reading practices will become even
more rapid and indirect, transforming the ways in which scientists engage the literature and
shaping the evolution of scientific publishing.

Scientists have always read strategically,
working with many articles simultaneously to
search, filter, compare, arrange, link, annotate,
and analyze fragments of content. Now, however,
two important trends are interacting to support
and intensify the effectiveness of these practices


 -->     3.6.1. The Wikidata Bib platform and the formalization of a reading discipline ? perhaps


The second is
the emergence within many scientific disciplines
of ontologies for representing and linking scientific data. This convergence of digital resources
and data-linking ontologies will result in even more
rapid and indirect use of the literature, supported
not only by text mining (1) and literature-based
discovery applications (2), but by “ontologyaware” strategic reading tools as well.

--> 3.6.1. The Wikidata Bib platform and the formalization of a reading discipline , yes! A formalization of a 10-year-old dream. 

Just as
the increased quantity of information and general
intensity of scientific activity is reaching the point
where it cannot be sustained with current practices, technology and user behavior are making
new practices feasible, and research scenarios that
a decade ago were utopian are now widely anticipated by practicing scientists. P. Bourne, a Public
Library of Science journal editor, offers this vision
of the near future

the scientific literature will seamlessly
provide annotation of records in the biological databases. Imagine reading a
description of an active site of a biological molecule in a paper, being able
to access immediately the atomic coordinates specifically for that active site, and
then using a tool to explore the intricate
set of hydrogen-bonding interactions
described in the paper.… Alternatively, if
you are starting with the data … viewing
the chromosome location of a human
single-nucleotide polymorphism associated with a neurological disorder, … immediately access a variety of papers
ranked in order of relevance to your profile … pinpointing the reference to the
single-nucleotide polymorphism in the fulltext article (6), p. 179.


--> We are very nearly there!!


# Comments

## Tags
1.1.3. Interoperable publication processes: nanopublications

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q33493284)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q33493284)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q33493284/P921%3BP4510)  
