
A novel type of glial cell in the retina is stimulated by insulin-like growth factor 1 and may exacerbate damage to neurons and Müller glia
===========================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q33695552]  
  
Publication date : 01 of April, 2010  

# Highlights

e identify a novel type of glial cell in the avian retina and provide evidence that these cells can respond to acute damage and IGF1. In normal retinas, we found a distinct cell-type, scattered across the ganglion cell and inner plexiform layers that express Sox2, Sox9, Nkx2.2, vimentin, and transitin, the avian homologue of mammalian nestin.

We conclude that NIRG cells are a novel type of retinal glia that is sensitive to IGF1 and whose activity may impact the survival of neurons and Müller glia.

trocytes and oligodendrocytes are known to
migrate into the retina from the optic nerve; these glia
are not generated by retinal progenitors (Barres and
Raff 1993, 1999). The types of glial cells differ in avascu-
lar retinas, such as those of chickens, guinea pigs, and
rabbits. In avascular retinas there are few, if any, astro-
cytes present (Prada et al., 1998; Won et al., 2000).

We next sought to assess whether the Sox9 1 /Sox2 1 /
Nkx2.2 1 /transitin 1 cells in the inner retinal layers were
microglia. Many reports have identified resident, quies-
cent microglia that are scattered across the IPL of differ-
ent vertebrates, including the chick (Cuadros et al.,
2006; Navascues et al., 1994; Won et al., 2000). Previous
reports have suggested that transitin and Sox9 are
expressed by cells that are scattered across the IPL in
the chick retina; these cells were thought to be quiescent
microglia-like cells (Fischer and Omar, 2005; Fischer et
al., 2009a).

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q33695552)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q33695552)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q33695552&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/GLIA.20950)  
