
Formalization of taxon-based constraints to detect inconsistencies in annotation and ontology development.
==========================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q33727235]  

# Highlights

Although the ontologies are intentionally developed to be taxon neutral, and to cover all species, there are inherent taxon specificities in some branches. For example, the process ‘lactation’ is specific to mammals and the location ‘mitochondrion’ is specific to eukaryotes. The lack of an explicit formalization of these constraints can lead to errors and inconsistencies in automated and manual annotation.

Detection of inconsistencies in taxon-specificity enables gradual improvement of the ontologies, the annotations, and the formalized constraints. This is progressively improving the quality of our data.

A number of different automated prediction methods are applied by members of the GO Consortium. These methods include transfer of manual GO annotations to closely related orthologs.

Sixteen evidence codes are used to describe manual GO annotation efforts, and one code, ‘IEA’ (Inferred from Electronic Annotation), describes all automatically-predicted GO annotations

The class ‘lactation’; GO:0007595 is defined as ‘The secretion of milk by the mammary gland.’ rather than ‘The secretion of milk by the mammary gland in mammals.’. In classes such as this, however, there is obvious implicit taxon specificity.

Where a GO class X has the only_in_taxon relationship to a taxonomic group Y, this indicates that that GO class and its sub-types and parts should only be used for annotation of gene products from organisms of that taxonomic group and its sub-types.

The constraint is inherited by sub- types and parts of the GO class, and it can be seen in Figure 1 that ‘lactation’ inherits this constraint from the GO class ‘mammary gland development’.

Where a GO class X has the never_in_taxon relationship to a given taxonomic group, this indicates that that GO class and its sub-types and parts should never be used for annotation of gene products from organisms of that taxonomic group or its subtypes

The never_in_taxon relationship is particularly useful in cases where gene products of some taxa are known to be inappropriate for annotation to a given GO class, but where we do not yet have enough information to make an only_in_taxon. 

Taxon classes are drawn from the NCBI taxonomy hierarchy and supplemented with union classes created for use in-house. For example, to capture the set of organisms carrying out photosynthesis in any form we have created the union class ‘Bacteria or Archaea or Viridiplantae or Euglenozoa’ (Figure 2)

In developing the taxon constraints there is always the concern of over- or under-constraint. If the constraints are too tight then we risk flagging correct annotations, whilst if the constraints are too loose, we risk failing to detect problems in the annotations or ontologies.

# Comments

A scope is different from a taxon constraint in it is not inherited by subtypes, at it is not only a constraint, but an expectation. 
For example, we do not expect to find photosynthesis in all bacteria. 

Union classes also needed for cell types. 


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q33727235)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q33727235)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q33727235/P921%3BP4510)  
