
Extracting a cellular hierarchy from high-dimensional cytometry data with SPADE
===============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34037159]  

# Highlights

SPADE organized cells in a hierarchy of related phenotypes that partially recapitulated well-described patterns of hematopoiesis. We demonstrate that SPADE is robust to measurement noise and to the choice of cellular markers. SPADE facilitates the analysis of cellular heterogeneity, the identification of cell types and comparison of functional markers in response to perturbations.

Gates are either manually drawn using software such as FlowJo and FlowCore, or automatically defined by clustering algorithms. Manual gating is highly subjective and depends on the investigator’s knowledge and interpretation of the experiment.

We developed the SPADE approach to extract a hierarchy from high-dimensional cytometry data in an unsupervised manner.

Flow cytometry data set from a mouse bone marrow sample. 

Mature myeloid cells are characterized by expression of the surface antigen CD11b, whereas lymphoid cells are negative for this marker.

Within the lymphoid population, B cells express B220 but not TCRβ, and conversely the majority of T cells express TCRβ but not B220. 

Finally, mature TCRβ-expressing T-cells are characterized by mutually exclusive expression of CD4 or CD8.

Next-generation mass cytometry technology currently provides simultaneous measurement of 31 or more markers per cell. Such a capacity allows enough surface markers to delineate nearly all cell types in human hematopoiesis, as well as additional functional markers to study cellular response to perturbations. 

Many classically defined immune cell subsets were immediately visible in the SPADE tree. Multiple nodes captured the abundant cell types, including B cells (CD19+), T cells (CD3+) and monocytes (CD33+).

In contrast, rare cell types, such as hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) only occupied a single node with high CD34 expression.

SPADE was able to cluster the NK cells without using NK-specific markers because the NK cells express a unique combination of the core surface  markers CD45+ CD45RA+ CD38+ CD19–, which distinguishes them from other cell types.

TNF induction of phosphorylated MAPKAPK2 was observed in myeloid and NK cell types (Fig. 5a).

This analysis demonstrates how SPADE can be used to map intracellular signal activation of functional markers across the landscape of human hematopoietic development.
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34037159)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34037159)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34037159/P921%3BP4510)  
