
The naming of neurons: applications of taxonomic theory to the study of cellular populations.
=============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34065481]  

# Highlights

(re-wrytten)

- Populations are the smallest units for which counterparts can be recogniced unequivocally accross a series of brains. 

- Discovery of types is best achieved by imitating the naturalist who seeks new biological species. 

- multidimensional population descriptions

- "describing for the reader typical cells"

--> We need cell types to describe the typical cells

- classifying neusonr in groups allows hypothesis formulation and testing

- For _Aplysia_, cell names are assigned to the smallest units recognizable in the foregoing sense. 

- Neuron Survey as a Taxonomy (section)


an investigator may survey a neural tissue specifically to describe its cellular populations. In such situations the neurobiologist is faced with difficulties remarkbly like those encountered by a naturalist such as Darwin embarking on the Beagle. 

polythetic concept of natural groups: a biological population can be described in terms of a substantial list of features. 


characters may be described in terms of two discrete states (present or absent), several discrete states (shape, action potentials fired) or may be continuously distributed (table 1) [SNEATH and SOKAL 1973]

some characters are more powerful than others. 

one would be ill-advised to assume too high a correlation between taxonomic utility and functional importance.


- Recognziing populations (section)

numerical taxonomy, the poponents of which argue that better results can be achieved with computer programs which perform the actual clustering of individuals. [SNEATH and SOKAL 1973] [BROMBERG AND WHITEHORN 1974] [DOETSCH AND ERIKSON 1970] [SCHIFFMAN AND ERICKSON 1971]


--> Maybe one of the first mentions of data-driven classification of cells [SNEATH and SOKAL 1973]

one often derives several schemes for the same data

- Identification (section)

As a taxonomist establishes a provisional classification system, he or she also devises an identification routine so that the subsequently examined individuals may be placed into appropriate sections.

--> Explicit and complete definitions make it very simple to make identification of cells to cell types.

Biologists have often thought neurons to be relatively stable over time. (...) Many neurobiologic phenomena are reatily interpreted as environmental interaction fith cells which are changing over long periods.

- "Reality" of Neuronal Populations (section)

a large animal`s brain would be fount to posses, in general, one menmber (at most) of each cell type. 

# Comments
--> Suggests the need of a taxonomy of cell types! Nevertheless, already embeds the notion of a single tree, which is the basis for the species.

--> Discusses collection bias, a core topic of current single-cell RNA seq discussions


