
A genetic and computational approach to structurally classify neuronal types.
=============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34182035]  

# Highlights
The importance of cell types in understanding brain function is widely appreciated but only a tiny fraction of neuronal diversity has been catalogued.

--> Classifications are not catalogues! Ref to Some thoughts on bacterial classification

The algorithm reproduces the genetic classes that are pure types, and detects six newly clustered cell types that await genetic definition.

--> "Pure types" is also quite a metaphysical concept

existing catalogues do not agree on the identity or number of RGC types despite intensive attempts. The number of putative types in large-scale studies ranged from 12–22 (refs 4–7).
Here we show that light microscopy (LM), the oldest technique
for structural classification of cell types, can be combined with computational techniques to yield improved spatial precision.

We use the arbor density function to perform hierarchical clustering of the cells. These steps alone can not define cell types, because there is no theoretically valid way to know where one should segment the hierarchical tree to define the clusters. We solve this problem by including in our sample several sets of RGCs that were independently defined by molecular genetic means.

mounting.We assembled a data set of 363 mouse RGCs drawn from 10 trans- genic lines. Seven of these lines (JAM-B8, CB2 (ref. 9), W3 (ref. 12), BD12, W7 (ref. 12), Cdh3 (ref. 16) and K included one or a few genetically defined cell types.

The most likely explanation is that the BDb and W3 appear in two genetically different mouse strains but are indeed the same cell type.

If the clusters (cell types) are reliable, a newly encountered cell should reliably be assigned to the correct cluster—that is, to the cluster made up of cells of the same type as the new one. We verified this prediction by a ‘thought experiment’ in which the algorithm was confronted by a new cell, but one whose identity we knew. This was done by a leave-one-out analysis.

--> This is sketchy...

A few known cell types are still missing from our data set. At the least, it is unlikely that our sample includes all types of the sparse melanopsin-expressing cells24,25. As a purely semantic matter, we are of course unable to identify the four directionally tuned subtypes of On–Off direction selective cells (the BDa cells) and if they are counted as distinct ‘types’ the number would be increased. A complete categorization does seem attainable however with a larger and more systematic sampling of RGCs (Supplementary Note 1).

--> The idea of a "complete classification" needs a more solid theoretical basis. Can we really have such a thing like a complete classification of cells? I do not think so, in the same way we struggle for a "complete classification" of individuals.


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34182035)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34182035)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34182035/P921%3BP4510)  
