
On the formalization and reuse of scientific research.
======================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34178056]  
  
Publication date : 13 of April, 2011  

# Highlights
The reuse of scientific knowledge obtained from one investigation in another investigation is
basic to the advance of science. Scientific investigations should therefore be recorded in ways
that promote the reuse of the knowledge they generate. The use of logical formalisms to
describe scientific knowledge has potential advantages in facilitating such reuse. Here, we propose a formal framework for using logical formalisms to promote reuse.

-->  1.2 Formal representation of knowledge
-->    1.3. Knowledge Representation in biology

 The EXPO (a generic ontology of scientific experiments) ontology formalizes domainindependent knowledge about the organization, execution and analysis of scientific experiments [7].
The more recent OBI (the Ontology for Biomedical Investigations) project (http://obi-ontology.org) aims
to model the design of an investigation: the protocols, the
instrumentation, and materials used in experiments and
the data generated [8]. Ontologies such as EXPO and
OBI enable the recording of the whole structure of scientific
investigations: how and why an investigation was executed,
what conclusions were made, the basis for these conclusions, etc.


The development of Robot scientists is significant for
the reuse of scientific investigations because with Robot
scientists, unlike human ones, the production of comprehensive metadata about their investigations is a
natural by-product of the way they work


To formalize Adam’s functional genomics experiments,
we developed the LABORS ontology (LABoratory Ontology for Robot Scientists) [11]. LABORS is a version of the
ontology EXPO [7] customized for Robot scientists. (For
clarity, below, we use italics for terms in the ontology
where appropriate.) 

The application of an ontology to describe a particular scientific investigation results in a logical description
of that investigation. Philosophers generally agree that
scientific knowledge is best expressed using formal
logical languages [13]

13 Toulmin, S. 2004 The philosophy of science. In Encyclopaedia Britannica Deluxe Edition 2004 CD. London,
UK: Encyclopaedia Britannica UK.

--> LOL! 

Formalization
makes it easier to compare like with like, and decreases
the chance of the introduction of systematic error into a
new investigation based on reusing information from
another.
Below we propose a formal framework for using logical formalisms to promote reuse. We then demonstrate
the utility of this framework by employing it in a
worked example from biology: demonstrating cycles of
investigation formalization and reuse to generate new
knowledge.


-->  maybe directly quotable for 1.2 Formal representation of knowledge

The SWI-Prolog engine can run queries specified by the
hypothesis expressed as a logical entity to find all
research units (studies, trials, tests, replicates) that
have S. cerevisiae as an object of study, involve the
yeast strain DYER152C, involve the yeast strain wildtype and use rich medium as an environment.


A comprehensively described scientific investigation is a
permanent contribution to knowledge, and therefore
improved ways of recording scientific investigations
make the scientific process more efficient. The use of
logical formalisms has clear theoretical advantages
over using natural languages owing to their clear
semantics and ability to represent all aspects of the
scientific process.

Of course, the demonstration of the utility of the
reuse formalization does not constitute proof that
such logical formalisms are generally applicable and
useful in practice for reuse, as that would require multiple test comparisons taken from multiple domains,
which we hope will occur in due course. However,
given their theoretical advantages, and the results presented here, we argue that the balance of evidence
supports the case for using logical formalisms to
describe research in order to promote its reuse.

--> Yes! I wonder how we get this to mainstream science, though. We need scientists to embrace this idea.

# Comments

## Tags
1.1.1

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34178056)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34178056)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34178056/P921%3BP4510)  
