
Overview of the Alliance for Cellular Signaling.
================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34164191]  

# Highlights
he Alliance for Cellular Signaling is a large-scale collaboration designed to answer global questions about signalling networks. Pathways will be studied intensively in two cells — B lymphocytes (the cells of the immune system) and cardiac myocytes — to facilitate quantitative modelling.

--> Cells clearly used to mean "cell types"!!

We have launched a major new research initiative called the Alliance for Cellular Signaling (AfCS; www.signaling-gateway.org): a multi- disciplinary, multi-institutional consortium to study cellular signalling systems.

We have limited ourselves to two cell types — the B lymphocyte and the cardiac myocyte. The two cell types were not easy choices, indeed both pose enormous challenges, and agreement was reached only after a great deal of discussion.

--> Later "cell type" is used !

Our goal is to understand the cellular signalling networks that convert a set of time-varying inputs into physiologically relevant outputs. This requires identification and localization of all the relevant molecules, definition of the physical interactions between these molecules, and quantitative assessment of the physiological significance of these interactions as information flows through the system

We need to know what ligands will activate signalling pathways in the chosen cells, what combinations of ligands will reveal interactions between signalling pathways, and what downstream responses are reliable indicators of signalling activity. The single and multiple ligand screens are designed to provide this information. 

--> It kind of considers a "model" cell, and almost says that these responses are homogeneous within the type of interest.

The data from this effort will allow us to attain our goal of performing the first molecular analysis of how a signalling network actually works. For this goal, it will almost certainly be inappropriate to adopt the
traditional reductionist approach of simply measuring in vitro all the Kd
, Km and Vmax values, cooperativity constants, rate constants and
molar concentrations for all molecules involved.

Socialistic aspects of the AfCS concept
The alliance is itself an experiment in collaborative science. There have been relatively few large-scale collaborations in basic biology. It is a young science that has flourished to date in the hands of individual investigators, directing relatively small laboratories. But the scientific questions posed by the AfCS are not suited to the traditional distributed approach to experimental biology.

The alliance offers this opportunity in a unique way, but only to those who are willing to donate a part of themselves to the group. We need socialistic science practised by strong individualists. Practical? We believe it is.

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34164191)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34164191)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34164191/P921%3BP4510)  
