
Constructing a semantic predication gold standard from the biomedical literature.
=================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34106676]  
  
Publication date : 20 of December, 2011  

# Highlights



Mapping text to ontological concepts emerges as the main challenge in conceptual annotation. Annotating predications involving biomolecular entities and processes is particularly challenging. While the resulting gold standard is mainly intended to serve as a test collection for our semantic interpreter, we believe that the lessons learned are applicable generally.

We have been developing a semantic interpreter, SemRep [19], which extracts content from biomedical text in the form of semantic predications. A semantic predication is a logical subject-predicate-logical object triple whose elements are drawn from the UMLS knowledge sources [20];

While the UMLS Semantic Network has not been designed as an ontology in a strict sense, the extended version that SemRep uses [21] serves as an ontological resource: it defines a domain model consisting of concept types (semantic types), relation types (ontological predicates) and the relationships that can hold between concept types (ontological predications).

The lack of a suitable, manually annotated gold standard corpus has so far precluded a formal evaluation of SemRep (for focused, task-based evaluations, see [27–29])

The ontology-based semantic annotation of the CRAFT Corpus [4] concentrates on biomolecular entities and processes, including gene/gene products, chemicals, sequence types, molecular functions, and cellular components. Ninety-seven full-text articles were annotated with concepts from eight terminologies, six of them from the OBO library [30]. They report that relationship annotation between concepts is ongoing work.

Three annotators, all authors of this paper, were involved in the annotation process. The annotators have diverse backgrounds; annotator A is a linguist, B a computer scientist and C a physician/biomedical informatics researcher. All three annotators have natural language processing experience and are experts in the SemRep methodology as well as the UMLS knowledge sources.

Using domain experts as annotators is often considered a good strategy to ensure validity and reliability of annotation.

The guidance at this phase consisted of the following items:

    1.  A list of core ontological predicates relevant to SemRep and their definitions from the UMLS. For ontological predicates that are not part of the official UMLS Semantic Network but are in the SemRep ontology, we used our own definitions. We provide these definitions in the Appendix.
    
    2.  An inventory of predicate types (preposition, nominalization, verb, etc.), also provided in the Appendix.
    
    3.  A sample sentence annotation, provided in the Appendix and illustrated in Figure 1.


In the main annotation phase, two annotators (A and B) annotated a set of 500 randomly selected sentences drawn from 308 MEDLINE abstracts from the past 10 years (average of 27.9 tokens per sentence)

Predication equivalence (PE): A pair of distinct semantic predications may be considered equivalent under specific conditions when one inverts the arguments of the other and the predicates correspond to certain types. For instance, a predication X-LOCATION_OF-Y may be considered equivalent to Y-PART_OF-X predicates when arguments (X or Y) correspond to biomolecular entities.

Gene/gene product correspondence (GP): A pair of concepts may be considered equivalent when one corresponds to a gene term and the other corresponds to its gene product.

<!-- Doesn't work exactly like this for Wikidata, though.  -->

a. Availability of conceptual knowledge (CK): A predication fulfills this criterion if both the subject and object arguments were extracted by MetaMap and, thus, were provided to the annotators.

b.Availability of relational knowledge (RK): A predication fulfills this criterion if it is sanctioned by the SemRep ontology. In other words, it corresponds to an existing ontological predication.

c.Availability of conceptual and relational knowledge (CRK): A predication fulfills this criterion if it satisfies both (a) and (b), the previous two criteria


Finally, the third annotator (C) examined the annotations provided by each annotator and adjudicated them to create the current gold standard. During this phase, annotator C was free to discuss the annotations with the actual annotator to understand his/her reasoning. This phase concluded in four weeks.

There was disagreement over what constitutes a hypernymic (ISA) relation. Problematic annotations included "C0050940: Lansoprazole (Organic Chemical)-ISA-C0599473: Enantiomer (Chemical Viewed Structurally)" for the noun phrase "lansoprazole enantiomers" and "C1443775: Epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor (Pharmacologic Substance)-ISA-C0450442:Agent (Chemical Viewed Functionally)" for the fragment "Two oral EGFR inhibitors ... are small-molecule agents ..

We conducted a relatively open-ended, multi-phase annotation study, in which we aimed to assess the feasibility of iteratively constructing a reasonable gold standard reference based on UMLS domain knowledge.

Molecular biology text is hardest to read and interpret for a non-expert and none of the annotators are experts in this subdomain. Furthermore, as Friedman et al. [37] have shown, biomolecular domain text constitutes a sublanguage, with very specific characteristics, such as complex and nested relations as well as more prevalent syntactic ambiguity. One interesting, syntactically ambiguous case involved the fragment 

"... IL-1beta-induced ROS formation, NF-kappaB activation, and MCP-1 secretion ...", where one annotator took the modifier "IL-1beta-induced" as modifying "NF-kappaB activation" and "MCP-1 secretion" as well as "ROS formation", and annotated the predications given in (6), while the other annotator took the modifier to modify "ROS formation" only, and did not annotate the predications in (6).


Another complicating factor in conceptual annotation is that the ontologies and vocabularies the concepts are derived from may change over time. There are two alternatives to address this situation: (a) using a static snapshot of the knowledge source (b) re-annotating at each update of the knowledge source.

Two sets of annotations and the adjudicated gold standard are made publicly available [39] for research purposes. 
A UMLS license is required. The corpus size is relatively small and may be insufficient for training information extraction systems



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34106676)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34106676)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34106676/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q34106676&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-12-486)  
