
Single-cell sequencing-based technologies will revolutionize whole-organism science.
====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34360540]  
  
Publication date : 30 of July, 2013  

# Highlights

 However, our Review focuses on
single-cell analysis using DNA-sequencing-based technologies. Although single-cell sequencing-based analysis
has been applied to both unicellular14 and multicellular
organisms15, this Review focuses on mammalian (primarily mouse and human) single-cell analysis

Tissues are rarely homogenous, and typically consist of
tens or hundreds of distinct cell types, which are often
intermingled and present at widely different abundances.

 Single cells can be isolated from such tissues in
various ways (TABLE 1), which can be classified as either
unbiased (randomized) or biased (targeted) sampling.
In principle, an unbiased sample better reflects the
composition of the tissue, but a targeted sample may
be necessary in order to isolate rare cell types.

--> Well, never unbiased.

Reconstructing cell lineage trees using somatic mutations. Different cells from the same individual were initially thought to harbour identical genomes. This turns
out to be false, not only for the immune system30 and
cancer cells31 (which both undergo somatic evolution)
and for germline cells that undergo recombination27
,
but for all cells in our bodies. During normal mitotic
cell division DNA is replicated with very high, but
not absolute, precision, which leads to the incorporation of somatic mutations. These somatic mutations, accumulated since the zygotic stage, endow each cell
in our bodies with a genomic signature that is unique
with a very high probability16. As the differences in cellular genomic signatures are mostly without phenotypic
effect, what would science gain by knowing them?
The answer is that knowing the unique genomic
signatures of our body cells allows the reconstruction
of cell lineage trees with very high precision16

--> Super cool and super true. Useful for 1.4.4, also.

For example: does
the oocyte pool renew during adulthood32? Do β-cells
renew33? Do neural progenitor cells produce each brain
cell type as needed, or do specialized progenitors each
produce a single cell type.



 Similarly, in general it is not possible to measure accurately and simultaneously
the ‘cellular position’ (for example, the genomic, transcriptomic, epigenomic and
proteomic state of a cell) and the ‘cellular momentum’ (for example, the next
differentiation, division or degradation event of a cell) for individual cells in an
organism. In order to know accurately the state of a cell, one must destroy it and analyse
its content, thereby eliminating cellular momentum. Alternatively, to observe cellular
momentum, one cannot interfere with the behaviour of the cell and hence must
compromise on precisely knowing the state of the cell. For example, using fluorescent
reporters that are minimally invasive, limited information can be obtained on both the
state and momentum of single cells


--> This is very interesting. It means we need bridges to connect the fundamentally incompatible types of knowledge.

 Labelling the leaves and internal nodes
of the reconstructed cell lineage tree with cell type and
state information requires further single-cell epigenomic
and transcriptomic analyses, as explained below.

The molecular state of cell populations. Given a heterogeneous cell population, measurement of the mean
values of key factors, such as the genotype, RNA output or epigenetic state of a locus of interest, provide
only a partial characterization of the state of the system. Unfortunately, most of the methods that are used
for quantifying the molecular state of a cell population, from transcriptional profiling to proteomics, are
based on estimating mean behaviours in ensembles of
millions of cells by averaging the signal of individual
cells

--> "state" being used not in the sense of a class, but as representing particular, nominal situation in space-time,  2.4.3. States, identities, fates, attractors and phenotypical continuity

Yet, our current level of understanding of cell types,
their origin, evolution and diversity is embarrassingly poor, despite progress in some specific cases85,86.
Furthermore, there is no general agreement on the
number of cell types in a mammalian body. In fact,
there is no agreement on what defines a cell type, and
finding such a definition must surely be one of the
most important goals as we embark on large-scale
single-cell transcriptome analysis. As a starting point,
we suggest that cell types can be provisionally identified as cells for which global transcriptional states are
similar. Just how similar, and just which parts of the
transcriptome are relevant, will be crucial questions
for the future. But this provisional concept of cell type
leads immediately to an unbiased method of celltype discovery (FIG. 3): collect a large, unbiased sample
of cells from the tissue of interest, generate transcriptomes for each cell and use computational methods
to find sets of similar cells.

--> Nice! Explicit statement of a  2.4.2. Modern perspectives of classification of cells . It is also a very open concept, as we can cluster cells in many many ways. 
--> Though, imagine a precursor cancer cell, with one, yet not activated, mutation. Is this cell of the same "type" as almost identical cells in the tissue? Wouldn't it be more similar to a cell of a different lineage, but also becoming malignant?

c | Subsequently, the resulting expression profiles are clustered. The result is a map of ‘cell space’, in which similar
cells are grouped close to each other. The strategy is shown here in cartoon form, but in practice it will be
necessary to collect and analyse thousands of cells in each tissue (that is, millions of cells overall) to make a
comprehensive cell space map of a whole organism.

Clearly, the genome and transcriptome of a cell capture
only part of its state, and much of the function of the cell
is determined by its epigenome and proteome, which
add to the diversity of cells in a population

--> "state" being used not in the sense of a class, but as representing particular, nominal situation in space-time again,  2.4.3. States, identities, fates, attractors and phenotypical continuity

Single cells are the fundamental units of life. Therefore,
single-cell analysis is not just one more step towards
more-sensitive measurements, but is a decisive jump
to a more-fundamental understanding of biology

As chemists
P. Murray-Rust and H. S. Rzepa remarked in 2004,
“The current transition to [PDF-based] e-journals
seems to be welcomed by many—but not us … a
cultural change in our approach to information is
needed” (7).

The goal often seems to be undifferentiated assimilation of information about a domain or a
problem at hand, and the online
experience may be highly valuable, even though no clear aim is
met and no articles to read are
located. In a compelling analogy,
Nicholas et al. (8) describe a “slightly irritated”
father watching his young daughter flick from
channel to channel while watching television
[the] father asks … why she cannot make
up her mind and she answers that she is
not attempting to make up her mind but is
watching all the channels. … gathering
information horizontally, not vertically
(8), p. 40.

Now we see what the migration from
traditional to electronic sources has
meant in information seeking terms. We
are all bouncers and flickers, and the
success of Google is a testament to that,
with its marvelous ability to enhance and
amplify this flicking and bouncing (like a
really good remote)…. In the past,
information seeking was seen to be the
first step to creating knowledge. Now …
it is a continuous process (8), pp. 41–42


Just as the aim of channel surfing is not to
find a program to watch, the goal of literature
surfing, is not to find an article to read, but rather
to find, assess, and exploit a range of information
by scanning portions of many articles. This behavior is common among scientists (9).


Structured terminologies for representing scientific data, along with standard XML-based techniques for defining and using these terminologies,
are forming the basis for new types of scientific
publishing.

--> Core for - 1.1.3. Interoperable publication processes: nanopublications 

Neither controlled vocabularies nor even
logic-based ontologies are entirely new, although
the enormous increase in the amount and complexity of biological data makes such organizational strategies increasingly urgent. Now, however,
we can make ontologies and their applications
computationally available and interoperable through
well-supported standards associated with the
Internet and World Wide Web.

--> YES YES YES!!  - 1.3. Knowledge Representation in biology and      1.4.5. Goals of this project

Fig. 4. Two examples of ontology-aware text mining/retrieval systems that support strategic reading. (Top) Textpresso (www.textpresso.org/) and
(Bottom) iHOP (www.ihop-net.org/).

--> iHOP seems super cool, but it is offline.

Lust 10 years, XML
and related supporting software and standards
have come to dominate information representation in networked environments—all popular
Web browsers support XML, and most major
database systems import and export XML-formatted
data

 That information must be recorded in the natural language
documentation for the schema, but then it is unavailable for computer processing. To address this
problem, the semantic Web languages Resource
Description Framework (RDF), Resource Description Framework Schema (RDFS), Web Ontology
Language (OWL), and Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL) were developed (24)

--> yeah, - 1.2.1. Descriptional logic and its historical context and - 1.2.2. Computational ontologies and their methods

Originally motivated by the need for data integration, scientific ontologies are now being explored for STM publishing to support information
retrieval and text mining, with applications for
hypothesis generation and knowledge discovery
well underway.

Scientists may have moved well beyond
traditional reading, but they still remain engaged
with the narrative of scientific articles and need
tools to help them read, and not only mine, that
narrative.

e integration of ontologies into the scientific literature has been recommended by leading
scientists (26–28), and the current generation of
ontology-based text mining and retrieval tools
in the biomedical sciences is already taking
advantage of natural language processing and
databases of annotations (5, 29, 30)

How Will Scientists Work with the Literature
in 2019?
Scientists will still read narrative prose, even as
text mining and automated processing become
common; however, these reading practices will
become increasingly strategic, supported by enhanced literature and ontology-aware tools.

As part of the publishing workflow, scientific terminology will be indexed routinely against rich
ontologies. More importantly, formalized assertions, perhaps maintained in specialized “structured abstracts” (27), will provide indexing and browsing tools with computational access to causal
and ontological relationships. Hypertext linking
will be extensive, generated both automatically
and by readers providing commentary on blogs
and through shared annotation databases. At the
same time, more tools for enhanced searching,
scanning, and analyzing will appear and exploit
the increasingly rich layer of indexing, linking,
and annotation information.

There are no technical obstacles to this trajectory, and it is already under way. The changes,
as always, will be incremental: Scientists, who
today already make extensive use of existing
indexing and retrieval services, will encounter a
steady stream of new enhancements and adopt
those that allow rapid and productive engagement with the literature. The new functionality
will sometimes be provided as part of the application interface (new features in PubMed, for
instance) or as shared external tools that users can
add to their Web browsers. These developments
chart a middle course between the already obsolete activity of finding an article to read on th
one hand, and the narrower objectives of text
mining on the other, responding directly to the
entrenched necessity and value of strategic reading in the daily work of today’s scientists.

--> We are so close and yet so far!
# Comments

Very nice article, well written.
## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34360540)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34360540)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34360540/P921%3BP4510)  
