
Master regulators or lineage-specifying? Changing views on CD4+ T cell transcription factors
============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34305590]  
  
Publication date : 12 of October, 2012  

# Highlights

 Here, we discuss how the natural co-expression of these lineage-specifying transcription factors has challenged the concept that the expression of a single 'master regulator' strictly establishes an absolute CD4+ T cell phenotype. Instead, it is becoming clear that the interplay between the lineage-specifying (or lineage-defining) transcription factors, including T-bet, GATA3, RORγt, BCL-6 and FOXP3, contributes to the fate and flexibility of CD4+ T cell subtypes. This in turn has led to the realization that CD4+ T cell phenotypes are more diverse than previously recognized.

 The simplified paradigm of the master regulator relies on the premise that each developmental cell type is defined by a critical transcription factor. This means that there is a transcription factor that is both required and sufficient for programming an individual cell fate. 

 n this Opinion article, we briefly examine how the 'master regulator' terminology has shaped our thought process in relation to CD4+ T cell subset differentiation.

 The current state of the field now suggests that the simplistic paradigm of a single master regulator transcription factor that applies to stable developmental decisions, such as T-helper-inducing POZ/Krüppel-like factor (ThPOK; also known as ZBTB7B) committing cells to the CD4+ instead of the CD8+ T cell lineage8, may not so neatly apply to the more flexible differentiation pathways of specialized CD4+ T cell subtypes.
  
Notably, it is becoming apparent that the expression of a single 'master regulator' transcription factor is not sufficient to define the phenotype of a CD4+ T cell subtype; instead, it is the context of its expression that is critical.

A well-recognized example demonstrating a functional role for the stable co-expression of two seemingly opposing lineage-specifying transcription factors can be found in specialized TReg cell populations39,40. Here, the simultaneous expression of FOXP3 with T-bet, GATA3, STAT3 or BCL-6 has been linked to the ability of TReg cells to suppress TH1, TH2, TH17 or TFH cell responses, respectively23,24,27,28,33.


cells that were previously defined as being 'TH2 cells' on the basis of their stable expression of GATA3 were found to upregulate T-bet in response to lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) infection25. This caused the cell to express a hybrid gene-expression programme with characteristics of both TH1 and TH2 cells. These cells were named 'TH2+1' to reflect this phenomenon,

These data also suggest that helper T cells do not fit neatly into strictly defined end-point lineages, but rather remain responsive to changing environmental conditions.

<!-- Seems like the kind of exception that strengthens the rule; the hybrid phenotypes appear to be combinations of the pre-existing, predefined occupations -->

Studies have shown that RORγt and T-bet co-expression in 'TH17' cells is promoted by the absence of transforming growth factor-β1 (TGFβ1), or a shift in the cytokine environment in favour of TGFβ3 (Refs 36, 44, 45)


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34305590)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34305590)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q34305590&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/NRI3321)  

# Reading dates
  
 * 2023-08-16
