
GeneCards: integrating information about genes, proteins and diseases.
======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34421185]  
  
Publication date : 01 of April, 1997  

# Highlights

To get an idea about the problems that
can be solved with the GeneCards data-
base, it is important to understand what a
'GeneCard' actually is. The GeneCard for
the recently discovered breast cancer gone
1 (BRCA1; Ref. 2) is a good example
because there is already a lot of interesting
information about this gone from different
fields. The GeneCard provides the follow-
ing information: (1) the official gone name
as approved by the HUGO/GDB nomen-
clature committee3; (2) a list of synonyms;
(3) homologous genes in the mouse;
(4) the chromosomal locations of the gone
and of its homologues; (5) the name of
the protein(s) encoded by the gone, in-
cluding brief descriptions about its cellu-
lar function, expression panems, similarities
with other proteins and involvement in
diseases; (6) a list of disorders in which
the gene is involved according to genetic
evidence; (7) new diagnoses and thera-
pies that can be regarded as being appli-
cations of the knowledge about this gene;
and (8) links to sites that contain fur-
ther information [e.g. the Genome Data-
base (GDB), SWISS-PROT, the Human
Gene Mutation Database (HGMD), Online
Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM),
and so on; Ref. 41.


An individual GeneCard, which offers
fast access to current biomedical infor-
mation about a particular gone and its
product(s), can be accessed by using our
powerful, but simple-ro-use, search engine.

We use a package of PERL
scripts (PLUK, package for locating useful
knowledge) developed by us for this pur-
pose.





# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34421185)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34421185)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q34421185&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0168-9525(97)01103-7)  
