
Single-cell RNA-seq reveals new types of human blood dendritic cells, monocytes, and progenitors.
=================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34555562]  

# Highlights

Atlas of human blood dendritic cells and monocytes

Dendritic cells (DCs) and monocytes consist of multiple specialized sub- types that play a central role in pathogen sensing, phagocytosis, and antigen presentation. However, their identities and interrelationships are not fully understood, as these populations have historically been defined by a combination of morphology, physical properties, localization, functions, developmental origins, and expression ofa restricted set of surface markers.

Single-cell RNA sequencing of~2400cells isolated from healthy blood donors and enriched for HLA-DR+ lineage− cells

six DC subtypes
four monocyte subtypes, and thus revise the taxonomy of these cells

DC subset, representing 2 to 3% of the DC populations across all 10 donors tested, characterized by the expression ofAXL, SIGLEC1, and SIGLEC6 antigens, named AS DCs.

This split is further reflected through AS DC gene expression signatures spanning aspectrumbetween cDC-like andpDC- like gene sets. Although AS DCs share prop- erties with pDCs, they more potently activate T cells. This discovery led us to reclassify pDCs as the originally described “natural interferon- producing cells (IPCs)” with weaker T cell pro- liferation induction ability.

A new subdivision within the CD1C+ DC subset: one defined by a major histocompatibility complex class II–like gene set andonebyaCD14+ monocyte–like prominent gene set

The discovery of AS DCs within the traditionally defined pDCpopulation explains many of the cDC properties previously assigned to pDCs, highlighting the need to re- visit the definition of pDCs.

It is unclear how many DC subtypes exist, how they are related to each other, and how they differ from other mononuclear phagocytes.

In the blood, DC subtypes include CD11C+ conventional DCs (cDCs), consisting of either CD141+ or CD1C+ cells, and plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs), consisting of CD123+ cells.

We developed an experimental and computational strategy to 
- perform single-cell RNA sequencing on DCs and monocytes derived from a single healthy individual;
- identify clusters of cells that are similar to each other; 
- find discriminative markers per cluster; 
- prospectively isolate cells corresponding to key clusters using newly identified surface markers; 
- validate the identity of the sorted cells using scRNA-seq; (vi) confirm the existence of these cell types in up to 10 independent healthy individuals; and 
- perform functional analyses for selected cell types.

Ficoll-enriched cells that were isolated by FACS excluding cells expressing markers of B, T, and NK cells.

For DCs, we sampled LIN–HLA-DR+CD14– cells across the CD11C+ fraction (to enrich for CD141+ and CD1C+ cDCs) and the CD11C– fraction (to enrich for CD123+ pDCs)

We defined six cell clusters within the LIN–HLA- DR+CD14– population using unsupervised analysis that did not rely on known markers of DCs

Several markers commonly used to identify pDCs were also expressed in the population defined by the DC5 cluster, leading us to define a new combination of markers that distinguish pDCs from the DC5 population. 

Discovering monocyte subsets and their relationships to DC subsets. The two largest clusters, Mono1 and Mono2, contained the CD14++CD16– (“classical”) and CD14+CD16++ (“nonclassical”) monocytes, respectively

Population emerged from the unbiased cluster analysis defined by coexpression of unique markers (e.g., AXL, SIGLEC1, SIGLEC6,and CD22/SIGLEC2). Flow cytometry analysis of peripheral blood mono- nuclear cells (PBMCs) from 10 independent donors confirmed the existence of AXL+SIGLEC6+ cells (“AS DCs”)

Taken to- gether, our data suggest that AXL+SIGLEC6+ DCs are related but not identical to cDCs or pDCs.

When we seeded cultures with pDCs and CD1C+ and CLEC9A+ DCs, we found that they generally retained the same phenotype throughout the differentiation assay.

Cells differentiated from AS DCs did not express BATF3 (a transcription factor required for terminal differentiation of CLEC9A+ DCs), CADM1,or XCR1, which are key CLEC9A+ DC discriminative markers (table
 
We found that AS DCs did not divide during the transition into CD1C+ DCs.

We leveraged our human DC atlas to compare pathogenic cells driving blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN), a rare and aggressive hematological malignancy previously known as NK cell leukemia/lymphoma.

DCs and monocytes are defined according to a combination of molecular markers, functional properties, and ontogeny. It remains unclear whether the expression of existing markers tracks with the more complex internal states of cells.

Previous studies classified human blood DCs into one pDC and two cDC populations. Our study identifies six DC populations.

Furthermore, a murine study identified noncanonical CX3CR1+CD8a+ cDCs (nc-cDCs), which ex- press pDC and cDC signatures. These findings suggest that AS DCs are similar to human CD2hi pDCs and murine nc-cDCs.

More generally, our use of the DC atlas to understand BPDCN cells illustrates how single-cell analysis can pinpoint relationships of diseased cells to healthy cells.

Nonetheless, some DC/monocyte subtypes were likely missed because they do not express MHC class II at rest, can onlybe defined bynon-RNAmolecules, are distinguished by low-abundance transcripts, or are onlypresent during inflammation, disease, or within tissues. To build a comprehensive im- mune cell atlas, future studies will need to address these challenges as well as localize these cell types within lymphoid and nonlymphoid tissues.

Healthy donors were recruited from the Boston-based PhenoGenetic project, a resource of healthysubjectsthatare recontactablebygeno- type (57), and the Newcastle community. Individuals were excluded if they had a history of cancer, allergies, inflammatory disease, autoimmune disease, chronic metabolic disorders, or infectious disorders. All healthy donors were nonsmokers, had a normal BMI and normal blood pressure, and were between 25 and 40 years of age.


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34555562)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34555562)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34555562/P921%3BP4510)  
