
LifeMap Discovery™: the embryonic development, stem cells, and regenerative medicine research portal
====================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q34846475]  

# Highlights
1 LifeMap Sciences LTD, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2 LifeMap Sciences Inc, Alameda, California, United States of America, 3 BioTime Inc. Alameda, California, United States of America

hand-curated reconstruction of cell ontology with stem cell biology; including molecular, cellular, anatomical and disease-related information, provides efficient and easy-to-use, searchable research tools.

LifeMap Discovery is freely available to academic nonprofit institutions at http://discovery.lifemapsc.com.

Cell: Cellular data is collected at specific developmental time points or embryonic stages (e.g. Theiler stage for mouse or Carnegie stages for human). Detailed developmental paths taken by cells directed toward specific fates, such as blood, endothelium, skeletal muscles, bone, cartilage etc. Somatic cells transverse a developmental path, which defines their cellular ontology from their first ancestor or ancestors (termed ‘‘primary progenitor’’) to the fully differentiated cell type.


--> Very weird use of the word ontology. Almost seems like a confusion with ontogeny. Actually, I am almost sure that is the case! 

The cell card displays the relevant embryonic developmental
stage, and provides a list of expressed genes which were gathered by manual curation and/or extracted from related microarray and/or in situ hybridization experiments

On a cell ontology level, LifeMap Discovery provides a browsing tool (Figure 5A) that lists all available developmental paths and allows various filtering. Following

B. ‘Cranial Neural Crest Cell’ (CNCCs) card shows the available information (e.g., gene expression) for these cells, accompanied by the interactive clickable graphical development viewer on the right. C.


The PureStem mesenchymal progenitor 7PEND24 card is
shown in Figure 6, containing a short description of the cell’s main characteristics and selective markers, followed by a short summary of the available data in the card (Figure 6A)

Figure 6. 7PEND24 PureStem Progenitor Cell Card. A. Cell description and available data summary. B. Gene expression list including expression pattern, assay type and links to external resources. C. Links to cell-related high-throughput experiments, available in the database. D. List of in vivo cells or anatomical compartments that were matched to the PureStem progenitor and the related genes for each match.E. List of culturing conditions and protocols related to the PureStem progenitor cell.

--> Looks like a mix of cell type and cell lines, which is confusing. The "derived cell" notion is interesting, though.

The underlying assumption motivating the mapping effort is
that stem or progenitor cells undergoing in vitro differentiation show similar gene expression patterns to their equivalent in vivo developmental state. Following that reasoning, knowledge of the exact or even approximate in vivo identity of a cell, i.e. it’s correlation to the developmental ancestry tree and its anatomical location or tissue type classification can extremely useful. This type of information has been previously scattered in papers and specific databases, and difficult or impossible to associate or assemble with the developmental context.

# Comments

Interesting to see such an enterprise based endeavour published in PLOS.

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q34846475)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q34846475)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q34846475/P921%3BP4510)  
