
Single-cell RNA-seq reveals dynamic paracrine control of cellular variation.
============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q35185544]  
  
Publication date : 11 of June, 2014  

# Highlights

e single-cell RNA-Seq libraries prepared from over 1,700 primary mouse bone marrow derived dendritic cells (DCs)

Distinct gene modules are characterized by different temporal heterogeneity profiles. In particular, a “core” module of antiviral genes is expressed very early by a few “precocious” cells, 

These observations raised several questions about the causes and roles of single-cell variability during the innate immune response: How does variability change during the response? Do different stimuli elicit distinct variation patterns, especially in stimulus-relevant pathways? Does cell-to-cell communication promote or restrain heterogeneity? Addressing these requires profiling large numbers of cells from diverse conditions and genetic perturbations

An average (population) increase in the expression of bimodally expressed genes may represent changes in the amount of transcript made by expressing cells (shifts in μ), the proportion of expressing cells (shifts in α), or both.

For LPS, we observed strong shifts in α (alone or with μ) at early time points for “core” antiviral and “sustained” inflammatory genes (Fig. 3d, top, Extended Fig. 5e,f), which transitioned to high and unimodal expression late in the response (Fig. 1&2). 

To test this hypothesis further, we added Brefeldin A (GolgiPlug), a secretion inhibitor, either simultaneously with LPS (“0h”) 

Using microfluidics, we achieved the statistical power needed to track transcriptome-wide changes in single-cell variation across a variety of conditions, as well as to identify novel rare responses. Microfluidics also allowed us to finely control the stimulation of our cells. Similar and improved techniques will be essential for characterizing other rare sub-populations, such as cancer stem cells, and for studying heterogeneous clinical samples and tissues.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q35185544)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q35185544)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q35185544/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q35185544&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/NATURE13437)  
