
Ontologies in biology: design, applications and future challenges.
==================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q35670188]  

# Highlights

Biological knowledge is inherently complex and so cannot readily be integrated into existing databases of molecular (for example, sequence) data.

This article reviews the principal bio-ontologies and the current issues in their design and development: these include the ability to query across databases and the problems of constructing ontologies that describe complex knowledge, such as phenotypes.

This review aims to cover the essential features of bio-ontologies, a relatively new area ofbioinformatics. It deals only briefly with the formal study ofontologies in com- puter science, as this is an established and well-documented field.

In an anatomy ontology, for exam- ple, the developing humerus might be defined as: part of
(in the sense ofa component piece of) the arm; has cell type osteoblast; has adhesion points formuscles; and is-a bone.Note that the terms do not represent an individual item but the associated set — that is, not the particular humerus ofEve Smith, but all humeri.

Ontologies are different from annotations (descriptions of data objects) in that they formalize the meaning of terms through a set ofassertions and rules that are collectively known as a ‘description logic’.An advantage ofontologies is that the description logic can be used both for querying an information set and for facilitating analyses across information sets that are not tradition- ally accessible to searching and comparing.

If different biological databases use the same ontologies to describe their data objects, the ontology IDs can be used as the currency with which associated data in individual databases can be retrieved.

There are, for example, several relationships that can be sub- sumed under part of: the coronoid process is a physical component ofthe ulna bone,marrow is contained within the ulna bone and the pancreas is a member ofthe glandular system (these types ofrelationship are the subject ofan area oflogic called ‘mereology’5
;see BOX 1).

First, its conceptual framework required an analysis of the contexts in which cells are used and described (morphology, function, species,and so on) and the sorts ofrelationships required (is-a and is-derived- from). Second, in attempting to make it useful for all organisms, ubiquitous cell types are at a much higher level in the hierarchy than those restricted to specific families oforganisms. Third, it required the garnering of data from a range of standard textbooks. Fourth, it involved people from widely different fields freely giving expert knowledge:Michael Ashburner and J.B.L.B. initi- ated the ontology and provided invertebrate and verte- brate data, whereas David States and S.Y.R. provided blood-cell and plant data, respectively. The prototype ontology is now publicly available for comment and is being improved by the community. In the end, the ontology will reflect the expertise ofthe community that uses it rather than that ofany individual and it will be available for anyone who wishes to code cell-type identities in a standard way.

The third, and still new, way ofhandling complex data, such as phenotype, is to combine terms in multiple, orthogonal ontologies to create a single new ontology.

--> Kind of what Wikidata does.

Interoperability, or the querying ofone database by another, is becoming increasingly impor- tant. Ontologies are beginning to be valuable here through the use ofthe unique IDs that are associated with each oftheir terms.

For example, Bodenreider and colleagues mapped UMLS, a highly specialized medical ontology, onto WordNet, an electronic lexical database for the English language, in an attempt to identify an overlap between the two24

Their work shows how the knowledge domains oftwo different types of community — medical specialists and the general public — can be linked.

As more knowledge of genetic networks is gleaned, we can also look forward to an ontology of signalling pathways. In addition, to fully correlate between phenotype and genotype, a systematic and standard way of describing genotype will be needed. It cannot be emphasized too strongly, however, that
the key to the general use of ontologies will be access to the data in biological databases that are annotated with the knowledge in these ontologies.

It is nevertheless reasonable to expect that the development ofontologies, annotation ofdata objects using the ontologies and sophisticated search tools should enable us to start to systematically address the missing gaps in our knowledge.

Mechanisms for sharing the development with those in the field — including establishing a forum for those interested in similar areas ofontology development and soliciting or incorporating feedback from individual researchers — will facilitate public ownership. Public support is just as important for maintenance ofontolo- gies as it is for databases. This will only happen if ontologies are actively curated and this, ofcourse, is the solution to the second problem.

If ontologies are properly curated over the longer
term, they will come to be seen as modern-day (albeit terse) textbooks providing online and up-to-date bio- logical expertise for their area. In another sense, they will provide the common standards needed for produc- ing a strong biological framework for integrating data sets. Ontologies therefore provide the formal basis for an integrative approach to biology that complements the traditional deductive methodology
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q35670188)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q35670188)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q35670188/P921%3BP4510)  
