
Neuronal cell types.
====================
  
  [@wikidata:Q35830509]  

# Highlights

How are neuronal types distinguished and why do neurobiologists care so much about them?

What do we mean by a cell type? This question has generated much tedious discussion, but the ultimate goal is simple — to find a way to single out a group of neurons that carry out a distinct task.Increasingly, cell types can be distinguished by their expression of genes and/or proteins. Occasionally they are first distinguished by characteristic patterns of electrical activity. But the commonest way is the shape of the cell

For convenience, neuroanatomists from Cajal’s time to the present have given them evocative nicknames,but this is only a mnemonic device. Like genes, some cells appear under several names.

A particularly unfortunate piece of vagueness pertains to the hierarchy of groups. Terms like ‘variety’, ‘class’, ‘type’, ‘subclass’, and ‘subtype’ are used indiscriminately. The technically correct usage is perhaps for a ‘class’ to represent a collection of ‘types’ that share a common feature. In this usage there is no place for a ‘subclass’—indeed, there is probably a need for more taxonomic levels. The term ‘type’ is sometimes reserved for the terminally differentiated level, and that usage will be followed here.

The term ‘pyramidal cell’ is used for neurons in several brain structures (there are hippocampal pyramidal cells). It is believed that many cell types exist within the large class of neocortical pyramidal cells, but there is at present no powerful and universally agreed way to distinguish them.

A mammalian retina contains five major classes of neurons divided into ~60 individual types.

--> The concept of majority of cell types is intriguing

For the first time in any substantially complex CNS structure, the inventory of cell types in the retina appears to be virtually complete.



# Comments
