
A maximum-likelihood approach for building cell-type trees by lifting
=====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q35906597]  

# Highlights

In cell differentiation, a less specialized cell differentiates into a more specialized one, even though all cells in one organism have (almost) the same genome. Epigenetic factors such as histone modifications are known to play a significant role in cell differentiation. We previously introduce cell-type trees to represent the differentiation of cells into more specialized types, a representation that partakes of both ontogeny and phylogeny. Results:

We then study the reconstruction of ancestral cell types; since both ancestral and derived cell types can coexist in adult organisms, we propose a lifting algorithm to infer internal node

Evolution and cell differentiation share a number of attributes. First, as mentioned before, we know that cell differentiation transforms less specialized cell types into more specialized ones. Since this transformation is unidi- rectional, the paths of differentiation can be represented as atreestructure,muchasisdonewiththe phyloge- netic trees used to represent evolutionary histories [7].

One major difference between evolution and cell differentiation is that func- tional changes in cell differentiation are primarily driven by programmed mutational events rather than by selec- tion. However, the program of mutational events is itself the result of evolution, so that, as observed by [6], the cell differentiation tree often recapitulates the phylogeny of cell types.

--> 6 is Detlev Arendt

Histone mod- ifications have been found to vary across cell types and to play an important role in gene regulation [9]. Since

The term “cell-type tree” was defined by our group to
refer to a tree relationship between various cell types [13]. The nodes of this tree represent cell types while the edges represent directed differentiation/evolution events from one cell type to another. We know that the genome is con- sistent across cell types of the same individual and that it is also highly similar between individuals of the same species, but that epigenomic states of various regions of the genome differ across various cell types. These epige- nomic states are believed to affect cell differentiation process through a complex interplay between histonemod- ifications, DNA methylation, transcription factors, etc.

Kin et al. [2] recently constructed a cell-type tree using RNA-Seq data and a parsimony-based approach under assumptions very similar to ours, using the same term of “cell-type tree” to denote the “hypothetical tree-like rela- tionship of cell types in ontogeny and phylogeny.”

multiple studies on different kinds of datasets—ChIP-Seq in our case, RNA-seq in the other two papers—support the tree-like relationship of cell types and underscore the usefulness of the cell-type tree (as noted in [2]).

--> Fundamentally different organization as classification of cell types as in Cell Ontology, for example.

In cell differentiation, both ancestral and derived cell types can coexist within the body. Therefore, it becomes important to be able to infer which cell types should be treated as the ancestor, or parent, of another.

Phylogenetic analysis: using distance-based, parsimony-based or maximum-likelihood-based phylogenetic approach. Inferring ancestral or internal nodes: we establish a parent-child relationship between the cell types (leaf data) using a process called lifting


H3K4me3 has been assayed in the largest number of cell types and is usually associated with gene activation [24]. Table 1 gives the list of the 37 cell types for which we gathered H3K4me3 data. The cells are classified into groups basedoncelltypeortissueorigin. (Keratinocytes (NHEK) is included in the Epithelial group). For human Embryonic StemCells (hESC) we have data for a differen- tiationtimecourseincellculture(day0,2,5,9,14),sowe shall use hESC T2 to mean data for hESC cells on day 2. We use only one replicate per cell type for this work.

Table 1 Cell types, short description, and general group for H3K4me3 data. For details see the ENCODE website [23]

The lifting approach is important since in cell differentiation, ancestral cell types can coexist with derived cell types in adult organisms. Our approach is easy to use and is probably the only current approach to build cell-type trees with ancestral inference. Hence we feel that our approach will be an effective way to help biologists and bioinformaticians to study the cell differentiation pro- cess.
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q35906597)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q35906597)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q35906597/P921%3BP4510)  
