
The effect of word sense disambiguation accuracy on literature based discovery.
===============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q36084900]  
  
Publication date : 18 of July, 2016  

# Highlights
However, biomedical documents are highly ambiguous which can lead LBD systems to over generate
hidden knowledge by hypothesising connections through different meanings of linking terms. Word Sense
Disambiguation (WSD) aims to resolve ambiguities in text by identifying the meaning of ambiguous terms. This study
explores the effect of WSD accuracy on LBD performance.

WSD accuracy varies depending on the approach used. The connection between the performance of the
LBD and WSD systems are analysed to reveal a correlation between WSD accuracy and LBD performance.

We note the following types of linking terms which tend
to over-generate connections:
1. Non-content words (words such as and and or).
2. Uninformative or very general words (such as patient
or week).
3. Ambiguous terms (words with multiple meanings
such as cold which can mean common cold, cold
sensation or Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease
(COLD)).

Using UMLS CUIs rather than terms helps to avoid the
generation of spurious hidden knowledge. 

Evaluating LBD is obviously not an easy task as no
gold standard can be constructed for hidden knowledge

The replication approach involves using a new LBD system to
reproduce a previously verified discovery


The second approach is timeslicing [19], where hidden knowledge is generated from articles published prior
to a certain cutoff date and a gold standard is extracted
from publications after the cutoff date (any ‘knowledge’
appearing in publications after the cutoff is deemed new).
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q36084900)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q36084900)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q36084900&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/S12911-016-0296-1)  
