
The Ontology for Parasite Lifecycle (OPL): towards a consistent vocabulary of lifecycle stages in parasitic organisms
=====================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q36368053]  
  
Publication date : 23 of May, 2012  

# Highlights

The paper describesthe Ontology for Parasite Lifecycle (OPL) and discusses its application inparasite research.Results:The OPL is based on the Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) and follows the rulesset by the OBO Foundry consortium. The first version of the OPL models complexlife cycle stage details of a range of parasites, such asTrypanosomasp.,Leishmaniasp.,Plasmodiumsp., andShicstosomasp.

Furthermore, there are several additional databases that have informa-tion  on  species-specific  phenotypes and many datasets produced by  individuallaboratories that are freely available. Each of these data sources represents parasite in-formation, and insufficient and/or distinct annotations make it difficult to effectively in-tegrate, query and retrieve relevant data.

heInfectious Disease Ontology (IDO) project (http://infectiousdiseaseontology.org/page/Main_Page) has initiated development of a family of ontologies including one for vectorborne diseases that already includes an extension covering malaria [20].The Ontology for Parasite Lifecycle (OPL) complements the efforts of the IDO pro-ject by developing an ontology that models complex details of parasite lifecycle

Moreover, there are at least two possible ways
to describe lifecycle stages; (i) generic lifecycle stages, such as sporozoite stage or epi-mastigote stage, and (ii) organism-specific lifecycle stages, such asP.  falciparumsporozoite stage,T.  cruziepimastigote stage orT.  bruceiepimastigote stage

--> Very similar to 2.4.4.2. Names for different classes of types

 Theorganism-specific lifecycle stages provides clear information that‘P. falciparumsporo-zoite stage’> has_participant > only‘P. falciparumsporozoite’and not any other kind ofparasitic species

 --> The difference that can be made between cell type and stage is subtle, if possible. Surely in daily language the concepts are mixed. They do make a difference, though, what is an interesting approach.

Further, the location of the parasite in a particular lifecycle stage was captured usingthe located_in property used between two continuants [23]; i.e.,‘T.  cruziepimasti-gote’> located_in > some‘Triatominaemidgut’. 

‘P.  falciparumsporozoites’> located in > some(‘Anopheles salivary gland’or‘human hepatocyte’)

The terms in OPL were collected from our collaborators and the community mem-bers who intend to use OPL. The ontology will continue to expand to meet the needsof a parasite research community to cover more eukaryotic parasites and their lifecyclestages. The BioPortal or Trykipedia site (http://wiki.knoesis.org/index.php/Trykipedia)will be used to collect more terms in the future. he current developmental version ofOPL is available at: http://webprotege.stanford.edu/#OPL 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q36368053)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q36368053)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q36368053/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q36368053&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
