
Human cell type diversity, evolution, development, and classification with special reference to cells derived from the neural crest
===================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q36514300]  
  
Publication date : 22 of June, 2006  

# Highlights

An updated list of cell types is presented for a familiar, albeit overlooked model taxon, adult Homo sapiens, with 411 cell types, including 145 types of neurons, recognised.


The artificial classification provides compelling (and independent) support for the neural crest as the fourth germ layer, while the cladistic approach permits the evaluation of cell type evolution. 


Whereas no two cells are identical in appearance, generalized patterns of morphology and biochemistry suggest that all cells conform to a relatively limited number of patterns (Willmer, 1970; Alberts et al., 1989 ; Valentine, 2003 ; see also Tyner, 1975; Rowe & Stone, 1977 ; Rodieck & Brening, 1983). These limited patterns of diversity are referred to as cell types.

<!-- Interesting for   - 2.4 The concept of "cell type"  -->

Along with other mutable biological units such as genes and species, cell types exist in nature but remain notoriously diﬃcult to deﬁne precisely and unambiguously (Valentine,
2002, 2003). Consequently, consensus on how many cell types exist in multicellular organisms such as humans remains unclear.


In an operational sense cell types, like species, are generally treated as numerically restricted entities. While most authorities (e.g. Alberts et al., 1989; Valentine, 2002, 2003)
acknowledge that some degree of variation exists between any two members of the same cell type, there is a consensus that cell type morphology, cytoanatomy, molecular biology,
and biochemistry are not inﬁnite. 

Furthermore, cell type identity is complicated by unusual cells that share features with two or more routinely encountered cells. For example, the  myoﬁbroblast is a ﬁbroblast-like cell found at sites of wound healing that expresses a-actin otherwise typical of smooth muscle cells. Finally, cells and cell types evolve (Fedak et al., 2002; Arendt, 2003; see below). Consequently, acceptance of a cell as an identiﬁable kind is often at the discretion (and opinion) of the author (Bell & Mooers, 1997). As stated by Rodieck & Brening (1983, p. 121) ‘ [d]iscovery [of cell types] is often a creative act ’

(1) All cells under consideration should be at the same stage of the cell cycle (gap phase 1, synthesis phase, gap phase 2, or mitosis). During the cell cycle there are con-
siderable diﬀerences in the amounts of protein, RNA and DNA synthesised, and overall cell morphology and size are subject to change (Alberts et al., 1989). With few exceptions
(e.g. osteoclasts), most cells ultimately enter senescence and die.

(2) All cells under consideration should be at the same stage of ontogeny or maturation. Cells have limited life spans and may demonstrate some morphological diﬀerences throughout their existence. Cells representing stem or undiﬀerentiated states, by deﬁnition, should not be considered or included as discrete cell types. Such progenitor or transitional states are subsumed into the listing as constituent members of diﬀerentiated cell type lineages.

(3) If cells are to be compared between individuals, the chronological age of each participant should be congruent.
To these caveats the following additions should be added :

(4) All cells under consideration should be obtained from in vivo, not in vitro, sources. Many cells change both their morphology and their biochemical products considerably
if maintained in culture. Chondrocytes placed in culture lose their rounded appearance, stop producing type II collagen, and come to resemble ﬂattened ﬁbroblasts ; ulti-
mately they begin to produce type I collagen (Alberts et al., 1989; see also Nelander, Mostad & Lindahl, 2003).

(5) If cells are to be compared between individuals, then the sex of each participant may need to be considered. In sexually reproducing organisms there are obvious diﬀer-
ences in both the cells supporting the gametes (within the reproductive organs) and in the gametes themselves, as well as cells that are sex-hormone dependent.


Schwann proposed a ﬁve-group classiﬁcation scheme for tissue types that eﬀectively established our modern view of cell categorisation. His categories
included isolated/independent cells (blood and lymph), independent cells in combination (epithelium), cells welded by intercellular substance (bone, enamel), ﬁbre cells (tendon,
loose connective tissue), and cells whose walls have broken down and whose cavities have run together (muscles, blood vessels, nerves).

For example, the ultrastructural atlas of human cells by Lentz (1971) identiﬁes 178 diﬀerent cell types grouped under 15 headings
related to function, organ system, and/or tissue type. A more recent assessment of human cell type categorisation is found in Alberts et al. (1989) who presented a tabulated
list of 210 human cell types subdivided into 20 categories (see also Freitas, 1999). As with Lentz (1971) and Stevens & Lowe (1997), the categories used by Alberts et al. mostly
relate to function.

<!-- Nice! Must read these; stuff for the last year of PhD / Thesis writing -->



Drawing on the notion that cell types represent (by deﬁnition) (terminally) diﬀerentiated states (i.e. end points), and that ultimately all cell types are derived from a single source, the zygote, useful analogies may be derived from a comparison between the diversity of cell types and the diversity of organisms (Tyner, 1975 ; Rowe & Stone, 1977 ; Rodieck & Brening, 1983; Maclean &Hall, 1987). Biological systematists and taxonomists haveexperience in developing, testing and adapting classiﬁcation schemes for large data sets. Whereascell types form tissues,
organs, and organ systems, groups of species form populations, communities, and ecosystems. As such, the analogy between cell types and organisms is not only convenient but practical.

Similarly, the same cell type (with common functions, morphologies and distributions) can be recognised in different taxa. For instance, Gall et al.
(1986) identified peripolar cells in the kidneys of 17 different species of mammals, including humans, giraffes, and the platypus. Morphologically, these cells also resembled peripolar cells previously described for amphibians.

The updated registry of human cell types presented herein (Appendix 1) was created by consulting a variety of sources from the literature, including Lentz (1971), Solcia et al.
(1987), Alberts et al. (1989), Anderson (1989), Campbell et al. (1989), Matthews (1989), Yelnik et al. (1991), Kolb, Lindberg & Fisher (1992), Dacey (1994), Mugnaini & Floris (1994),
Ostapoﬀ, Feng & Morest (1994), Kiernan (1998), Caterina & Julius (1999), Sanders et al. (1999), Canning & Fischer (2001), Cant & Benson (2003), Somogyi & Klausberger
(2005), and Yáňez et al. (2005). 

The catalogue was initially assembled assuming that all cell types recognised in the literature are natural entities (i.e. exist independent of investigation and investigator ; Rodieck & Brening, 1983). In addition, this rationale draws attention to even poorly known and weakly supported cell types, with the expectation that future investigations will provide more deﬁnitive evidence supporting (or refuting) such claims (see also Rodieck & Brening, 1983).


Owing to the availability of data, strictly speaking some of these cells (e.g. sympathetic neurons) may represent groups and not necessarily a single cell type. In addition, for other cells
immature members of the lineage were included in the scoring (e.g. for some characters features of osteoblasts were scored for osteocytes).

total of 34 terminal artiﬁcial classiﬁcation categories (designated A to HH) were obtained, as nested subsets of the original fourfold polychotomy. The resulting artiﬁcial
classiﬁcation scheme is presented in Fig. 1. Appendix 1 provides a detailed summary of all cell types included in each artiﬁcially derived category, as well as the germ layer
of origin

 much of
this attention has come from specialised clinical studies, it
may be argued that, at least in some instances, the degree
of atomization is overly generous (McShea, 1996). Furthermore, outside of anthropology, palaeoanthropology, and
primatology, humans are not commonly considered as
model organisms for the study of evolution

Recent work by Jongeneel et al. (2005) has determined that differences in gene expression profiles between various cell types are largely regulated by a relatively limited number of cell-type-specific genes.

. Owing to
the availability of data, strictly speaking some of these cells
(e.g. sympathetic neurons) may represent groups and not
necessarily a single cell type. 

Paulsen (1993, p. 307) escribes chromaffin cells as ‘… contain[ing] large nuclei,
abundant electron-dense secretory granules …, a welldeveloped Golgi complex, a few profiles of RER [rough
endoplasmic reticulum], and many oval mitochondria’.


Although there may be many tens of trillions of cells in a mature human body (including 1012 glial cells and 1011 neurons in the brain alone; Gilbert, 2003), the most comprehensive published tabulation of cell types suggests that there are only some 210 varieties (Alberts et al., 1989).
However, while this list is extensive, it is by no means complete; a recent calculation by Freitas (1999) suggests a theoretical maximum of 370 cell types in humans. Indeed,
as Alberts et al. (1989) admit to making no attempt to identify all the various types of neurons and other nervous system cell types, their catalogue grossly under
represents this group of cell types. As estimated by Bonner (1988) and Valentine (2002), there may be as many types of neurons as there are other types of cells. In support
of this claim, a recent summary identified 14 types of neurons from the enteric nervous system of the guinea pig small intestine, each with a unique combination of
morphological and biochemical properties (Furness, 2000). Other data suggest that smooth muscle cells and fibroblasts may also represent an uncalculated diversity of cell types
(Maclean & Hall, 1987; Alberts et al., 1989; Fries et al., 1994; Freitas, 1999).


With few exceptions, acceptance of this compilation requires that each cell type listed is presumed to represent a mature, fully differentiated entity (cells are terminally differentiated) and that these cells have a stable differentiation. It is worth observing however that some cell types appear to be phenotypically transient and develop as a specific response to a particular condition. For example, Lo´pez et al. (2004) demonstrated that renin-secreting cells of the kidney (which function in regulating blood pressure and electrolytes) differentiate
in response to fluctuations in homeostasis. If homeostasis is normal, many (although not necessarily all) of these cells dedifferentiate into non-renin-secreting cells such as smooth
muscle or epithelial cells. In addition to renin-secreting cells, our tabulation includes other ‘condition-specific’ cells including plasmacytoid dendritic cells (dendritic-like cells
formed in response to viral infection) and myofibroblasts (fibroblast/smooth muscle-like cells present at healing wounds).

A total of 34 terminal artificial classification categories (designated A to HH) were obtained, as nested subsets of the original fourfold polychotomy.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q36514300)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q36514300)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q36514300&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1017/S1464793106007068)  
