
Use of Gene Ontology Annotation to understand the peroxisome proteome in humans
===============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q36543290]  
  
Publication date : 17 of January, 2013  

# Highlights

We discuss the steps taken to define theperoxisome proteome and the challenges encountered in defining the boundaries of this protein set. We illustrate withthe use of examples how GO annotations now capture cell and tissue type information and the advantages that such anannotation approach provides to users.

A GO slim is a subset of terms that describe broad cate-gories of processes/functions or subcellular locations thatcan provide an overview of the common attributes of agene or gene product set (12).

nnotations to 296 non-peroxisomalproteins were also captured where functional data weredetermined alongside the peroxisomal proteins of interest,thus making full use of all papers manually curated. A totalof 1551 annotations were created in this process.

he GO annotation format allows curators to capturenegative statements about a protein’s role using the‘NOT’ qualifier. 

 An example of this would be the MK pro-tein (UniProtKB Q03426), which is not peroxisomal contraryto expectation (15).

 Table 1.Capturing cell- and tissue-type information in a protein GO annotation using the annotation extension field

 --> Cool

Capturing of cell and tissue type information alongside sub-cellular localization and protein molecular function canenable users to quickly ascertain in which cells or tissues cer-tain peroxisomal-based functions are performed. This addedlayer of information allows some comparison of peroxisomalabundance between different tissue and cell types of thebody to be made. Thecaveat scholasticusfor using this celland tissue type information in human is that althoughuseful, this information is less complete compared withother species due to issues regarding tissue availability.

As the human peroxisome proteome has now been com-prehensively annotated, it was of interest to compare thefunctional attributes of the human peroxisome with thoseof the peroxisome from another species.

We have defined a human peroxisomal annotation setusing the GO vocabulary. From this effort, 88 of the initial126 proteins were confirmed peroxisomal by a publisheddirect experimental assay (evidence code ‘Inferred fromDirect Assay, IDA’). To date, this is the only publicly avail-able peroxisomal protein list separating experimentallydetermined and predicted subcellular localization informa-tion for this organelle that also provides the supportingcitations.

 sequence considerations cannot eliminateall peroxisomal false positives as target sequence function-ality has been shown to be dependent on numerous fac-tors,  including  protein  conformation  and  targetingsequence accessibility. Other proteins with a fully func-tional PTS will be targeted to peroxisomes in some tissuesor cells and not in others. An example is soluble epoxidehydrolase that localizes to the peroxisomes of hepatocytesand the proximal tubule but in tissues like the adrenalgland, the protein is exclusively cytosolic (29).

 The generaGiardia,TrichomonasandEntamoebadonot contain peroxisomes (31), however, some protein se-quences from these genera contain sequence motifs thatare often used as indicators of peroxisomal localization

 

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q36543290)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q36543290)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q36543290/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q36543290&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
