
Robust enumeration of cell subsets from tissue expression profiles
==================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q36539395]  

# Highlights

We present cell-type identification by estimating relative subsets of RNA transcripts (CIBERSORT), a computational approach that accurately resolves relative fractions of diverse cell subsets in GEPs from complex tissues (http://cibersort.stanford.edu/).

--> Site is up and running
Changes in cell composition underlie diverse physiological states of metazoans and their complex tissues. For example, in malig- nant tumors, levels of infiltrating immune cells are associated with tumor growth.

To assess the feasibility of leukocyte deconvolution from bulk tumors, we designed and validated a leukocyte gene signature matrix, termed LM22. It contains 547 genes that distinguish 22 human hematopoietic cell phenotypes, including seven T-cell types, naïve and memory B cells, plasma cells, natural killer (NK) cells and myeloid subsets (Supplementary Table 1, Supplementary Fig. 2 and Online Methods). Cell subsets can be further grouped into 11 major leukocyte types on the basis of shared lineage (Supplementary Table 1). To

--> Full expression matrix, doesn't specify marker per cell type (albeit some are quite clearly abundant in only one cell type). Matrix based on purified cells, and nicely presents the details of the purification procedure.

We next investigated CIBERSORT’s discriminatory ability on cell types with correlated GEPs, which can be difficult to resolve in mixtures owing to multicollinearity15. Previous approaches avoid this issue by using cell type–specific marker genes7,8,13 or highly distinct GEPs4,5. In contrast, CIBERSORT does not require cell type–specific expression for every gene, suggesting applicability to diverse cell phenotypes.

To evaluate CIBERSORT against ground- truth measurements of leukocyte content in solid tissues, we used flow cytometry.

--> Ground truth of marker-defined types.



Performance on well-defined mixtures We then benchmarked CIBERSORT on idealized mixtures with well-defined composition
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q36539395)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q36539395)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q36539395/P921%3BP4510)  
