
Genes and homology in nervous system evolution: comparing gene functions, expression patterns, and cell type molecular fingerprints.
====================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q36625916]  
  
Publication date : 22 of September, 2005  

# Highlights

s. This
approach matches and aligns embryonic regions along the body axes, between remote
bilaterians. It does not tell us much, however, about the complexity of structures that
developed from these regions in Urbilateria. (IV) This is overcome by a novel variant of
molecular homology research, the comparison of cell types
Here, a similar "molecular  fingerprint" of cells is taken as indication of cross-bilaterian homology. This approach makes
it possible to reconstruct the cell-type repertoire of the urbilaterian nervous system. 


 Urbilateria, the last common ancestors of Protostomia and
Deuterostomia. Did it already possess eyes, brains, and nerve cords, and if yes, of
what complexity


f one considers cephalopod and vertebrate eyes homologous 'as
eyes', as is now put forward based on molecular data (Gehring and Ikeo, 1999), this
implies not more (and not less) than that Urbilateria already possessed structures
that were complex enough to meet the definition of "eyes". These presumably were
very simple two-celled eyes without a lens (Gehring and Ikeo, 1999). This does by no
means, however, imply homology of vertebrate and cephalopod eyes 'as pinhole
camera eyes' with lens and iris. For this degree of complexity, evolutionary
convergence remains the most plausible option.
Morphology-based attempts to establish homology on the next lower level, the
cell-type level, have also largely failed, at least at larger scale. 

While Eakin, in a series of papers (Eakin, 1968, 1979,
1982), advocated homology of ciliary photoreceptors in Deuterostomia and of
rhabdomeric photoreceptors in Protostomia, Salvini-Plawen and Mayr instead put
forward convergent evolution of photoreceptors in at least 40 independent
evolutionary line


If two orthologous genes exert a fairly similar function in two extant species, their
common precursor gene most likely did the same in their common ancestor. 

--> Interesting the encapsulation of so much inside a "gene"


Also, we learn much from the simple fact that an animal-type opsin exists in
Volvox and Chlamydomonas (Deininger et al., 1995; Ebnet et al., 1999), two species
of green algae related to plants: This tells us that photosensitivity based on animaltype opsin existed in the last common eukaryote ancestor of animals and plants and
thus from the very beginning of metazoan evolution

enes and homology IV: the molecular fingerprint of cell types
This novel variant of molecular homology research focuses on the conservation and
diversification of cell types in animal evolution
A cell type is a homogeneous population of cells expressing the same set of
orthologous genes for specification and differentiation, to implement a defined
cellular phenotype (Arendt, 2003). For example, in the nervous system motor
neurons (Thor et al., 1999), interneurons (Rincon-Limas et al., 1999), and sensory
cells (Melkman and Sengupta, 2005) all develop according to a cell-type-specific
"combinatorial code" of transcription factors (Shirasaki and Pfaff, 2002) that act
both synergistically and independently in turning on specific sets of effector genes
(Allan et al., 2005). I refer to the unique combination of genes active in a given cell
type as molecular fingerprint

--> 2.4.4. A pragmatic definition of cell type; interesting view.

These examples show that we are facing an entirely new variant of molecular
homology research emerging. The molecular comparison of neural cell types
integrates the classical morphological comparisons (see Introduction) with the study
of orthology and paralogy relationships of neural transcription factors and effector
genes (Section I) and the comparative analysis of their function (Section II) and
expression (Section III).

e ultimate strength of the cell-type comparative approach will only show with
time. As a possible caveat, it is not clear yet whether, and how easily, cell types can
also converge in their molecular fingerprint. To find this out, numerous cell types in
various organisms will have to be compared, in order to extract clear examples of
evolutionary convergence (such as, possibly, olfactory neurons). Only then, an
estimate of the frequency and probability of conservation versus convergence events
can be given. Also, we have to nominate and distinguish genes prone to novel
recruitment, and genes that instead reliably stick to their cell types of origin.
Investigating this latter category should make it possible to decipher the
diversification of neuron types in nervous system evolution, and ultimately allow
reconstruction of nervous system complexity at any desired node in the animal
evolutionary tree, such as Urbilateria. The beginnings are very promising. 

# Comments
cool stuff.


## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q36625916)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q36625916)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q36625916/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q36625916&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q36625916/P921%3BP4510)  
