
Preliminary evaluation of the CellFinder literature curation pipeline for gene expression in kidney cells and anatomical parts.
===============================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q36776925]  
  
Publication date : 18 of April, 2013  

# Highlights

Here, we present the curation
pipeline of the CellFinder database, a repository of cell research, which includes data derived from literature curation and
microarrays to identify cell types, cell lines, organs and so forth, and especially patterns in gene expression. The curation
pipeline is based on freely available tools in all text mining steps, as well as the manual validation of extracted data.
Preliminary results are presented for a data set of 2376 full texts from which >4500 gene expression events in cell or
anatomical part have been extracted. Validation of half of this data resulted in a precision of 50% of the extracted data,
which indicates that we are on the right track with our pipeline for the proposed task. However, evaluation of the methods
shows that there is still room for improvement in the named-entity recognition and that a larger and more robust corpus is
needed to achieve a better performance for event extraction.

http://cellfinder.org/

--> Database is good but is not up to date

a. It is based on a novel ontology [Cell:
Expression, Localization, Development, Anatomy (CELDA)
(http://cellfinder.org/about/ontology)], which allows standardization and integration to other available ontologies
on the cell and anatomy domains

Our literature curation pipeline has been evaluated
using a dataset on the kidney cell research. The kidney consists of >26 cell types, which arise and organize into several
anatomical structures during a conserved developmental
proces

to identify relevant research describing cells and their interactions
in normal and diseased kidney, we decided to include species-independent experimental and clinical data of renal
disease and of kidney development in CellFinder. For the
kidney cell use case, information is compiled about characterization of gene expression profiles in cells and other
anatomical locations, such as tissues and organs. Hence,
named-entity extraction is performed for genes, proteins,
cell lines, cell types, tissues and organs

The sentence below illustrates one such example (PMID 18989465):
On the other hand, the podoplanin expression occurs
in the differentiating odontoblasts and the expression
is sustained in differentiated odontoblasts, indicating
that odontoblasts have the strong ability to express
podoplanin.

s. Genes/proteins were
extracted using GNAT (42), anatomical part and cell line
recognition was performed by Linnaeus (43) using 13 anatomical ontologies and one for cell lines

Full texts documents were first split by sentences using the
OpenNLP toolkit (http://opennlp.apache.org/) 

For the recognition of cell types and anatomical parts,
we use Metamap (56), a system for Unified Medical
Language System (UMLS) concept extraction.


Cell types have also been extracted using an ontologybased approach in which synonyms from the CL are
matched against the full texts. It consists on a list of 2786
cell types from 1491 terms and matching is again performed by Linnaeus (43). Finally, triggers are extracted
based on a list of 509 expression triggers, which was built
manually. Terms from the list are matched against the full
text using Lingpipe (http://alias-i.com/lingpipe/).


Metamap returns annotations with regard to Concept Unique Identifier (CUI) terms, the original UMLS identifiers

These events are composed of a trigger, which is always linked
to two arguments, a gene/protein (hereafter called ‘Gene’
argument) and a cell line, cell type or anatomical part
(hereafter called ‘Cell’ argument).


n. The questions assessed whether there was a
gene expression event taking place in the snippet, including its negation, whether the named entities were correctly
recognized or if the publication was relevant for the kidney
cell research. This resulted in the following possible
answers: [1] Yes, an event is taking place and all entities
are correct. [2] Yes, but the text says the gene expression is
NOT taking place. [3] No, no event is taking place although
all entities are correct. [4] No, this is not a gene expression
trigger. [5] No, this is not a gene. [6] No, this is not a cell or
anatomical part. [7] No, both gene and cell or anatomical
part are incorrect. [8] No, the snippet (publication) does not
seem to be relevant for CellFinder.

Indeed, no gene expression events
have been extracted from the two development documents
of the CF-hESC corpus included in the development data
set of the CF-Both corpus. This probably due to the high
complexity and variability of the cell types in the CF-Kidney corpus, with examples such as ‘NCAM cell’ or
‘EpCAMNCAMNTRK2+ cells’.


development data sets when allowing overlaps and an
improvement is also perceived when type equality is
relieved, which shows that some genes overlap with some
cells names or anatomical parts, such as ‘C34’ (a gene) and
‘C34 cell’ (a cell type)

Cell types were sometimes poorly recognized for the
CF-Kidney data set, owing to the high variability of the
nomenclature and the presence of gene expression in its contents, such as ‘NCAM+NTRK2+ cells’ or ‘Gata3/Ret cells’.

We presented here our preliminary results for the text
mining pipeline for curation of gene expression events in
cells in anatomical parts for the CellFinder databas


# Comments

## Tags
1.3.1.4. Cell Ontology (and CELDA)
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q36776925)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q36776925)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q36776925/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Preliminary%20evaluation%20of%20the%20CellFinder%20literature%20curation%20pipeline%20for%20gene%20expression%20in%20kidney%20cells%20and%20anatomical%20parts.'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
