
What's Luck Got to Do with It: Single Cells, Multiple Fates, and Biological Nondeterminism.
===========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q36988221]  
  
Publication date : 01 of June, 2016  

# Highlights

We discuss how the concept of ‘‘random’’ differences is context dependent, and propose that
rigorous definitions of inputs and outputs may bring clarity to the discussion. We also categorize ways in
which probabilistic behavior may influence cellular function, highlighting studies that point to exciting future
directions in the field.

There is a fairly broad appreciation in the biological community
that the behavior of individual cells may vary from the popula-
tion average, giving rise to an entire field of ‘‘single-cell
biology’’ (Balázsi et al., 2011; Eldar and Elowitz, 2010; Raj
and van Oudenaarden, 2008; Trapnell, 2015).

For any given difference between cells, say, the expres-
sion of a particular gene, one must assume that difference
arises—deterministically—from some other difference between
the cells in the past, say, the spatial configuration of transcription
factors regulating the gene. This ‘‘cellular butterfly effect’’
makes the very word ‘‘random’’ difficult to rigorously justify.
We will later propose instead a framework centered around
more concrete operational definitions based on mappings be-
tween inputs and outputs (Figure 2).

C) Nine-banded armadillos are a polyembryonic species, with a single fertilized egg typically giving rise to quadruplets. While these genetically identical in-
dividuals seem very similar at first glance, some traits, such as the patterning of the head shield (h, with two different patterns shown in the red circles) and the
banded shield (b) can be highly variable. Image of armadillos from Vogt (2015), with permission of Springer. Photo: Brian Bagatto.

Single-cell RNA-sequencing has allowed us to probe the entire transcriptome
of individual cells, and while technical questions about accu-
racy remain (Grün et al., 2014; Marinov et al., 2014; Wu et al.,
2014),

Yet for most genes, the root
source of probabilistic expression levels is most likely the low
copy number of the gene itself, combined with the fact that in
many instances, the transcription of genes is itself pulsatile,
with transcription occurring in ‘‘bursts’’ (Bahar Halpern et al.,
2015b; Chubb et al., 2006; Golding et al., 2005; Levsky et al.,
2002; Raj et al., 2006; Suter et al., 2011). How do we know these
bursts are a manifestation of the probabilistic execution of the
transcriptional mapping?



In mammalian
cells, imaging studies have revealed that bursts from the two al-
leles are largely uncoordinated (Levesque and Raj, 2013), thus
showing that bursts themselves are a major source of nondeter-
minism in gene expression.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q36988221)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q36988221)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q36988221&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MOLCEL.2016.05.023)  
