
The evolution of nervous system centralization
==============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q37055970]  
  
Publication date : 01 of April, 2008  

# Highlights

To find out, a series of recent molecular studies have compared neurodevelopment in slow-evolving deuterostome and protostome invertebrates, such as the enteropneust hemichordate Saccoglossus and the polychaete annelid Platynereis. 

Even though these definitions are straightforward,
the categorization of some animal nervous systems
remains ambiguous (Miljkovic-Licina et al. 2004). For
example, some cnidarian medusae possess an elaborate
nerve ring around their central opening (manubrium)
in addition to their diffuse nerve net (Mackie 2004).
This nerve ring reflects a considerable degree of
centralization.

Subdivision of the neural anlage into regions
(‘molecular anatomy’). Another aspect of nervous
system centralization amenable to comparative
studies is how the developing nervous system
relates to the molecular anatomy of the body.

With the recent progress in the identifi-
cation of conserved neuron types by molecular
fingerprint comparisons (Arendt & Nübler-Jung
1999; Thor & Thomas 2002; Arendt et al. 2004),
and using the conserved molecular anatomies as
universal molecular maps, the localization and
spatial segregation of neuron types can now be
compared between remote bilaterians

Figure 3. Conserved neural cell types in annelid and
vertebrate. The neuron types emerging from homologous
regions in the molecular coordinate systems in annelid and
vertebrate and expressing orthologous effector genes are
marked with the same colour
n 

Platynereis,
serotonergic neurons likewise emerge from the medial
nk2.2 columns and pioneer the longitudinal tracts and
segmental nerves (red in figure 3; Denes et al. 2007).
One type of serotonergic neurons also emerges from the
nk2.1C brain regions, as evidenced for Platynereis and
fishes (Tessmar-Raible et al. 2007) as well as sea urchin
(Takacs et al. 2004).

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q37055970)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q37055970)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q37055970&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1098/RSTB.2007.2242)  
