
Ontology-aware classification of tissue and cell-type signals in gene expression profiles across platforms and technologies.
============================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q37327539]  
  
Publication date : 12 of September, 2013  

# Highlights

We present Unveiling RNA Sample Annotation (URSA) that leverages the complex tissue/cell-type relationships and simultaneously estimates the probabilities associated with hundreds of tissues/cell-types for any given gene expression profile.

An interactive web interface for using URSA for gene expression analysis is available at: ursa.princeton.edu

--> Site is still up, cool. 

Yet, to take full advantage of the entire compendia in all the above contexts, we must explicitly uncover tissue/cell-type-specific signals in genome-wide expression data.


discriminating among different subtypes of blood is a much harder one. Second, the method should maintain consistency with the developmental and anatomical relationships between these tissues and cell-types. Third, the method must be robust across independent datasets to overcome study/laboratory biases

The task of indexing these large heterogeneous data collections by tissues/cell-types presents substantial challenges

. URSA constructs individual tissue/cell-type classifiers based on ontology-aware sample labels and uses Bayesian Network Correction (BNC) (Barutcuoglu et al., 2006) to integrate these individual classifiers.


Furthermore, although URSA is trained on data from the single most popular microarray platform, it is able to make tissue/cell-type predictions (without re-training) for samples measured by other microarray platforms and even by next-generation RNA sequencing.

With an ontology of tissues, these manually curated annotations can be hierarchically propagated: e.g. monocyte samples can also annotated to leukocyte and blood (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Fig. S2)


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q37327539)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q37327539)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q37327539/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q37327539&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTT529)  
