
Extraction and analysis of signatures from the Gene Expression Omnibus by the crowd.
====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q37315128]  
  
Publication date : 26 of September, 2016  

# Highlights

However, currently, performing integrative analysis of largecollections of gene expression studies to obtain a global integratedview of cellular regulation requires a significant data wranglingeffort, that is, manually unifying data formats, adding metadataand converting the data to be more machine readable


One of the advantages of carefully annotating studies fromdatabases such as GEO is the potential for developing a signaturesearch engine that operates at the data level. Tools such asSIGNATURE3,   SPIED4,   Cell   Montage5,   ProfileChaser6,ExpressionBlast7and SEEK8automatically attempt to computedifferentially expressed  signatures from GEO to provide asignature search engine at the data level. However, these toolsare prone to mistakes because they automatically select thecontrol and perturbation samples, as well as other aspects ofsignature generation and annotation, without relying on anextensive high-quality gold standard, which is needed for trainingbetter-quality classifiers.


Through a massive open online course on Coursera, over70 participants from over 25 countries identify and annotate 2,460 single-gene perturbation signatures,839 disease versus normal signatures, and 906 drug perturbation signatures. All these signatures areunique and are manually validated for quality

We develop a web portal to serve these signatures for query, download and visualization.

Crowdsourcing projects fall into two categories: microtasks andmegatasks13,14. Microtasks consist of relatively trivial tasks thatrequire a large number of participants; for example, extractingfeatures from images of cells15. Crowdsourcing microtask projectsin  biomedical  research  have  been  established  to  improveautomated mining of biomedical text for annotating diseases16,curation of gene-mutation relations17, identifying relationshipsbetween drugs and side-effects18, drugs and their indications19,aswell as annotation of microRNA functions20. These effortsproduce large collections of high-quality datasets that can befurther utilized by algorithms that can extract new knowledgefrom already-published data that require better annotation,cleaning and reprocessing.

After identifyingrelevant studies, participants extracted metadata from the studiesand computed differential expression using GEO2Enrichr25,aChrome extension  we developed  that makes the signatureextraction process easy for non-experts. 

 Next,we compared the collection of the crowdsourced gene expressionsignatures with MSigDB29, which contains 8 collections of genesets.

 Toprovide easier access to the three collections of the geneexpression signatures for knowledge reuse and exploration, wedeveloped a web portal (Supplementary Fig. 6). This portalvisualizes all of the signatures in a packed circles layout in whichsimilar signatures are closer to each other. 

 While we highlighted several top predictions that emerged from our analysis, many more hypotheses can beformed  by  interacting  with  the  CREEDS  portal  at:http://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/creeds .

## Tags
- 3.12 Linked GEO and curation of transcriptomics datasets

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q37315128)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q37315128)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q37315128/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q37315128&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/NCOMMS12846)  
