
Molecular neuroanatomy: a generation of progress.
=================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q37624780]  
  
Publication date : 31 of December, 2013  

# Highlights
• The use of DNA barcoding to catalog neuronal cell types and connections is presented.
• It is argued that New technologies are needed for defining cell types and connectivity.

Eighty percent of the 20 000 genes in the mammalian genome are expressed in the central nervous system [5]. These distinct patterns of gene expression underlie neuronal identity, anatomical boundaries, and the specification of neuronal circuits.

The Allen Mouse Brain Atlas is a high-resolution 2D and 3D digital atlas of the C57BL/J mouse brain populated by 20 000 transcripts [5, 6, 7]. 

Figure 3Micrograph of anti-EGFP stained coronal section through the brains of a Cre recombinase BAC transgenic mouse line generated by the GENSAT project.

The NIH Neuroscience Blueprint Human Connectome Project is a 5 year project designed to map the brain connectivity of 1200 healthy adults, including 300 twin pairs and their non-twin siblings, to correlate connectivity with genetic and behavioral data (Figure 4).

Overcoming the problem of spectral overlap between genetically encoded calcium indicators (GECI) and optogenetic activators allows the simultaneous use of blue-activated channel rhodopsin, to stimulate neuronal activity, with a red-shifted GECI to record neuronal activity [55].

Several different approaches have been used to profile transcriptionally individual cell types in the nervous system. These methods include immunopanning (PAN), laser capture microscopy (LCM), fluorescent activated cell sorting (FACS), manual sorting of fluorescently labeled cells (manual) and translating ribosome affinity purification (TRAP), and Ribo-tag.

Using barcodes to inventory neuronal cell types and connections
Outstanding questions
•
How many cell types are defined by their molecular profile and connectivity in the mammalian brain?
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q37624780)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q37624780)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q37624780&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TINS.2013.11.001)  
