
Representation, simulation, and hypothesis generation in graph and logical models of biological networks.
=========================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q37921686]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2011  

# Highlights
This chapter presents a discussion of metabolic modeling from graph theory and logical modeling perspectives.


This chapter discusses metabolic network modeling from two
related perspectives: graph theory and logical modeling. It
includes an informal presentation of some of the possible representations in graph theory, propositional, and first-order logic
(FOL), and how these representations are related.


Logic and graph (LG) models are related qualitative representations for modeling metabolism, where the interactions and network structure are represented without quantitative details such
as reaction kinetics/dynamics. Graph-based models are used in
metabolic databases such as KEGG and EcoCyc/MetaCyc, where
metabolic pathways are represented explicitly with each metabolite being a node in the graph and edges representing the chemical
transformations found in the reactions comprising the pathway.
Such qualitative methods differ from quantitative methods such
as flux balance analysis (FBA) and ordinary differential equation
(ODE) models.


Logic and graph models have been developed to study many
components of systems biology including metabolism, signaling
pathways, and transcription networks, for example:
• Lemke and coworkers (10, 11) have developed a graphbased model of the metabolic network of Escherichia coli
and have used it to analyze how much damage the absence of
each enzyme causes to the metabolic network

• The BIOCHAM system (12) is a dedicated biochemical reasoning engine

• Random Boolean networks (13, 14) have also been used
to model 106 genes comprising a yeast transcriptional network

In propositional logic, logical formulae or rules are constructed
by combining atomic propositions with logical connectives (AND
(), OR (), NOT (¬), and IF (←)). Each proposition has a
truth status, i.e., one of {true,false}. The implication connector
divides each rule into a head (LHS, left-hand side) and a body
(RHS, right-hand side).


In brief, first-order logic (FOL) is an extension of propositional
logic that, by the introduction of quantifiers and predicates, significantly extends the scope of knowledge than can be expressed using logic representations. FOL has been a core modern concept in mathematics and philosophy, and in artificial intelligence (AI). The logic programming language Prolog is a useful subset
of FOL with additional support for functions such as arithmetic
evaluation and default negation (9). There are now highly efficient computational theorem provers for Prolog. We will limitthe discussion of modeling in FOL to Prolog.

-->        1.2.1. Descriptional logic and its historical context


Logic programs consist of sets of general rules
and facts (see example below). General concepts can be introduced
in Prolog by the use of variables 

s. Hypothesis generation in FOL or Prolog, on the other hand,
requires techniques from inductive logic programming (ILP) or
relational learning (23), where the hypotheses and experimental observations are expressed as logic programs.

The generation of hypotheses using ILP techniques usually
involves searching in a very large, possibly potentially infinite,
space of potential candidates. Much ILP research (23) has been
devoted to the discovery of heuristics that can direct the search
to the most promising candidates

. In this model, some (orphan)
reactions were included based on biochemical evidence, but
their encoding ORFs were not known. ADAM generated candidate ORFs/hypotheses by using sequence similarity searches.
ADAM generated experiments to test these hypotheses using the
model deductively. This process resulted in the generation of
20 hypotheses for genes encoding 13 enzymes for the orphan
reactions, with confirmation of 12 hypotheses

The Computational Biology group in Aberystwyth University have recently commissioned a new Robot Scientist, “Eve,”
designed for drug discovery.

# Comments

## Tags
    1.2. Formal representation of knowledge    
    1.3. Knowledge Representation in biology

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q37921686)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q37921686)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q37921686/P921%3BP4510)  
