
A survey on annotation tools for the biomedical literature.
===========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38068801]  

# Highlights

The lack of gold standards is considered as one of the main bottlenecks for developing novel text mining methods.This situation led the development of tools that support humans in anno- tating texts

Altogether, we considered almost 30 tools,13 of which were selected for an in-depth comparison.


e life sciences where texts deal with millions of entities whose naming often does not follow any regularities or conventions [3] and where relationships between entities may differ in highly subtle ways [4]

A GSC is a set ofdocuments where all mentions of facts of interest have been manually annotated by a human expert.

Comprehensive annotation guidelines are therefore important, i.e. documents which convey a precise definition of the facts to be annotated.

One important distinction to make is that between annotation and curation. By annotation, we mean the complete tagging of a given text with respect to some intended facts [17], usually for the construction ofa gold standard

By curation, in turn, we mean the analysis of a given document with respect to some information being sought for.

Tools which focus on annotations of Web documents have not been considered either, such as Domeo [43]. General purpose curation tools which do not allow the manual annotation of texts, such as Textpresso [33] and PaperBrowser [44], are also not the focus of this survey.

Tools were selected for an in-depth analysis ifthey are freely available, support a sufficient general class of annotation tasks and have been previously applied to biomedical texts. Thirteen tools met these criteria: @Note, Argo, Bionotate, Brat, Callisto, Djangology, GATE Teamware, Knowtator, MMAX2, MyMiner, Semantator, WordFreak and XConc Suite.

Djangology [22] is a web application for collabora- tive and distributed annotation of documents. It was originally developed for annotation ofnamed entities in medical studies of trauma, shock and sepsis con- ditions. The tool is based on the Django web frame- work and annotations are saved in a database (PostgreSQL, MySQL, Oracle or SQLite are sup- ported). Annotations

GATE Teamware is a web-based collaborative an- notation and curation environment [23] based on the GATE infrastructure [18]. The system has been used for annotating documents related to fungal enzymes [62], lignocellulose research [63] and for the OT (OrganismTagger) corpus [64].

Knowtator [20] was used by a number of biomedical annotation projects, such as the CRAFT corpus [65], annotation of elec- tronic patient records in Swedish [66], clinical entities and relationships in the CLEF Corpus [67], semantic analysis ofPubMed queries [68, 69], concept analysis [70], radiology reports [71], temporal expressions in medical narratives [72] and drug–drug inter- actions [73].

Three of the 13 tools only support annotation of named entities, namely @Note, Argo and Djangology.

plug-ins or extensions of other, often highly com- plex systems (GATE, Prote´ge´ or Eclipse), installation may be involved and require the pre-installation of other packages (cf. criterion C10). About half of the tools run in a Web environment, namely Argo, Bionotate, Brat, Djangology, GATE Teamware and MyMiner (cf. criterion C7). Argo and MyMiner can be used without any installation, which implies that annotated texts in first place are hosted on an exter- nal server.

Our study shows that there is no perfect tool
which would be recommendable in any situation. Nonetheless, we believe that as long as the require- ments of a project are not too special, researchers aiming at annotating a biomedical corpus should be able to find a tool which complies with their needs.

--> Wikidata annotation is somewhat special :) 

Only few tools allow the use of ontologies, specially standard formats such as OBO and OWL.
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38068801)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38068801)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q38068801/P921%3BP4510)  
