
Neuronal organization of olfactory bulb circuits.
=================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38251585]  
  
Publication date : 03 of September, 2014  

# Highlights

Therefore, neurons in the olfactory bulb have conventionally been categorized based on the layers in which their cell bodies are found; namely, juxtaglomerular cells in the glomerular layer, tufted cells in the external plexiform layer, mitral cells in the mitral cell layer, and granule cells in the granule cell layer.
 
The purpose of this review is therefore to discuss the expanse of existing work on neuronal diversity in the olfactory bulb up to this point, so as to provide an overall picture of the olfactory bulb circuit.

Since the first rat odorant receptor was cloned in 1991, approximately 400 and 1000 different functional odorant receptors have been identified in the human and mouse genome, respectively (Buck and Axel, 1991; Zhang and Firestein, 2002; Nei et al., 2008; Adipietro et al., 2012).

In addition, some olfactory bulb neurons have not been typically included in conventional categories due to their relatively small numbers [e.g., short-axon cells in the External plexiform layer (EPL) and the granule cell layer (GCL)]. 

Moreover, new neuronal types and connections in the olfactory bulb continue to be discovered (Merkle et al., 2014).

The PG cell is the most abundant type of neuron in the GL (Parrish-Aungst et al., 2007). These cells have the smallest cell body (5–10 μm in diameter) among the three morphological types.

PG cells typically project their dendrites to a single glomerulus, and only occasionally to multiple glomeruli.

The somata of sSA cells are slightly larger than those of PG cells, at 8–12 μm.

The ET cell has the largest cell soma among the three types of JG cells, at 10–15 μm

The primary dendrites of ET cells are generally mono-glomerular, with a small subpopulation being di-glomerular (Ennis and Hayar, 2008).

TABLE 1. GLOMERULAR LAYER.

<!-- Nice table, very convertable to Wikidata -->

It is tempting to relate type-I and type-II PG cells to ON-driven cells and ET-driven cells, respectively. However, the relationship may not be that straightforward.


Such studies imply that the number of cellular molecular subtypes will continue to grow in the future based on the combination of multiple molecular markers. However, expression of many molecular markers (e.g., calcium-binding proteins) does not suggest the function of the cell subtype in and of themselves. Functional characterization of each cell subtype will therefore be essential.

ET cells have long been considered exclusively glutamatergic. However, the latest study has revealed a novel and interesting subtype of ET cells, which is identified by its expression of vesicular glutamate transporter (VGLUT)3. A portion of this subtype is found to be not only glutamatergic but also GABAergic (Tatti et al., 2014).

Another study has classified ET cells into VGLUT2-positive and VGLUT3-positive subpopulations. 


Nonetheless, TH-positive neurons with interglomerular processes (i.e., the TH+/GAD67+ sSA cells discussed earlier) may not be generated in adulthood (Kosaka and Kosaka, 2009).

Odor signals, which are processed within the glomerulus, propagate in the EPL along the primary dendrite of two types of projection neurons, mitral and tufted cells (Figure 1).

The signal arrives at the cell body of tufted cells in the EPL and mitral cells in the mitral cell layer (MCL), then horizontally back-propagates through the secondary dendrites in the EPL

In other organisms frequently used in olfactory research, such as the fly and the fish, mitral, and tufted cells are not morphologically well segregated and are accordingly categorized into a single group of projection neurons (Satou, 1990; Bargmann, 2006).

Targets of axons also differ between tufted cells and mitral cells (Haberly and Price, 1977; Skeen and Hall, 1977; Scott et al., 1980).


Hence, the EPL could be subdivided into at least two sublayers, the superficial/outer and the deep/inner layers, although a clear marker for the sublayers is not known. Interestingly, an early report identified a third intermediate sublayer, which is labeled by cytochrome oxidase (Mouradian and Scott, 1988).


 To the contrary, the cell bodies of mitral cells are surrounded by adjacent mitral cells in the MCL. 


 Functionally, tufted cells have lower thresholds to induce spike discharges by electrical stimulation of olfactory sensory neurons (Ezeh et al., 1993)

In addition, subsets of mitral cells extend secondary dendrites in the superficial EPL (Imamura and Greer, unpublished data) and may not represent either type-I or type-II mitral cells

This new type of mitral cell may thus make a unique odor-processing contribution and receive dendritic inhibition in the superficial EPL (like tufted cells), as well as strong somatic inhibition in the MCL from type-S granule cells (also see GCL section). Recently, several reports have suggested the presence of different types of mitral cells based on their structural and functional properties

These data suggest the possibility that mitral cells can be subdivided based on the expression levels of specific molecules. Recent reports revealed that intrinsic biophysical properties also vary among mitral cells, such as firing frequency (Padmanabhan and Urban, 2010) and the Ih sag current (Angelo et al., 2012)

PV-positive cells in the EPL have quite varied structural properties. They can be categorized into five groups: sSA cells, Van Gehuchten cells, multipolar-type cells, inner short-axon cells, and inner horizontal cells (Kosaka et al., 1994). The latter two are regarded as particular subtypes or variations of the multipolar-type cell. 


Van Gehuchten cells
This neuron type is considered an axonless cell. Van Gehuchten cells have medium-sized somata (∼12 μm) and few dendrites with polarized extension patterns

Several other types of granule cells do not fit into type-I, II, or III categories. Naritsuka et al. (2009) discovered a novel type of cell in the GCL of a transgenic mouse expressing GFP under the control of the nestin promoter. The cell was named a type-S cell based on its strong GFP expression.

Due to their characteristic features, the authors also called type-IV and -V granule cells deep-branching granule cells and shrub granule cells, respectively. 

An estimated 10,000 new neurons are generated in the adult mouse SVZ and enter into the olfactory bulb via the rostral migratory stream every day. 

To date, the replacement of type-S cells has not been investigated. Although adult-born granule cells are distributed throughout the MCL, IPL, and GCL, several studies have suggested that adult-born granule cells are located in the deep GCL with higher density, while embryonically/perinatally born granule cells are preferentially located in the MCL, IPL, and the superficial GCL (Lemasson et al., 2005; Imayoshi et al., 2008)

The molecular mechanisms regulating the production of specific granule cell types are not well known.


Based on morphological diversity revealed by Golgi staining, dSA cells in the rodent olfactory bulb were initially defined belonging to one of four cell types: Blanes cells, Golgi cells, horizontal cells, and Cajal cells. Schneider and Macrides (1978) described the morphology and location of the various dSA cells in the hamster olfactory bulb. 

Blanes cells are mostly found in the GCL or the IPL and have the largest cell body (16–23 μm) of the four dSA cells. They also have stellate dendrites covered with many spines. 

Golgi cells likewise are found in the GCL. Their cell bodies are slightly smaller than those of Blanes cells (12–22 μm), and their dendrites rarely have spines.

 Both horizontal cells and Cajal cells have the smallest cell bodies (15–18 μm), are restricted to the IPL and MCL, and have smooth dendrites. To date, all dSA cells are considered to be GABAergic, as are their post-synaptic target cells. 
 
Recently, dSA cell morphologies were reconstructed after electrophysiological recording in a rat olfactory bulb slice (Eyre et al., 2008). Overall, the dendrites of all four dSA cell types were restricted to the layers below the MCL. Despite the Schneider and Macrides report of the extension of Cajal cell dendrites to the EPL, this was not described by Eyre et al. Although the input sources were not revealed in detail, both excitatory and inhibitory inputs apparently modulated the activity of dSA cells.

Eyre et al. (2008) next re-classified dSA cells into three subpopulations according to their axonal distribution patterns in the olfactory bulb. 


ccording to the authors, GL-dSA cells have an overall appearance of horizontal cells or Golgi cells.

The second re-classified dSA cell population is the EPL-dSA cell. Axons of EPL-dSA cells ramify predominantly within the EPL, and never enter the GL.

The third re-classified population is the GCL-dSA cell.


In general, recent studies in neuroscience have increasingly revealed the intricacy and complexity of the olfactory system, providing more a detailed, albeit a more complicated, diagram of the olfactory bulb network. However, many issues must still be addressed to accurately categorize neuronal types and to complete a comprehensive diagram of this network.
# Comments


## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38251585)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38251585)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q38251585&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/FNCIR.2014.00098)  
