
Owlready: Ontology-oriented programming in Python with automatic classification and high level constructs for biomedical ontologies.
====================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38371991]  
  
Publication date : 14 of August, 2017  

# Highlights

Existing query languages (such as SPARQL) and APIs (such as OWLAPI) are not as easy-to-use as object programming lan-
guages are. Moreover, they provide few solutions to difﬁculties encountered with biomedical ontologies.
Our objective was to design a tool for accessing easily the entities of an OWL ontology, with high-level
constructs helping with biomedical ontologies.

(1) many entities are represented by classes (rather than individuals), but the existing tools do not permit manipulating
classes as easily as individuals, (2) ontologies rely on the open-world assumption, whereas the medical
reasoning must consider only evidence-based medical knowledge as true. We designed a Python module
for ontology-oriented programming.

Owlready has been successfully used in a medical research project. It has been published
as Open-Source software and then used by many other researchers.

The development of recent biomedical terminologies has also been
heavily inﬂuenced by ontologies. Examples are SNOMED CT (Stan-
dardized NOmenclature of MEDicine – Clinical Terms) [7], Gene
Ontology [8] and the FMA (Foundational Model of Anatomy) [9],
which was recently converted to OWL 2 [10].

However, fewer options are available for ontology program-
ming interface, a problem identiﬁed by Rector et al. [12]. Ontology
programming interfaces are tools for accessing and modifying
an ontology within a programming language. 

For example, when a physician checks the contraindications
of a drug, he considers that all contraindications are known (and
listed in ofﬁcial texts and drug databases), even if this might not
be entirely true.

In conclusion, a mix of open- and closed-world assumption
is needed for the medical reasoning. This is usually referred to
as local closed world reasoning.

2.2. The main medical concepts cannot be represented by
individuals, but only by classes

Patient data is typically
described at a ﬁne granularity, e.g. “M. X suffers from Crohn disor-
der”, while medical knowledge is described at a more general level,
e.g. “this drug is contraindicated with intestine inﬂammatory dis-
orders” (thus including Crohn disorder).

Classes are usually more complex
to manipulate than individuals, and thus this point complicates
the use of ontologies in the biomedical domain. For example, in
order to assert that Crohn disorder is a chronic disease, we need
a single (subject, predicate, object) RDF triple if Crohn disorder is
represented by an individual in the ontology:
(crohn disorder, is chronic, true)
On the contrary, if Crohn disorder is represented by a class, we
need a “role-ﬁller” constructs (noted ∃ R.{i} in Description Logics
(DLs) notations, or “R value i” in Protégé, R being a property and i
an individual or a literal). In OWL, it is represented by a restriction
which requires 4 RDF triples and a blank node ( bn):

(Crohn disorder, rdfs:subclassOf, bn)
( bn, rdf:type, owl:Restriction)
( bn, owl:onProperty, is chronic)
( bn, owl:hasValue, true)

In the literature, Schulz et al. [19] also noticed that RDF triples
(corresponding to individuals and their data) were not enough for
representing medical knowledge and even patient data.

Second, SPARQL is based on RDF and not OWL. Thus, SPARQL is
data-oriented, it performs queries but no inference. Moreover, it is
possible to query the individuals in the ontology, but manipulating
the classes, for example adding new restriction (such as ∀ R. C), is
more complex, although still possible [21]. This point is particularly
problematic in the biomedical domain, since we have seen that
most medical concepts, such as disorders and drug treatments, are
classes in ontologies.

Ontology-oriented programming tries to connect, or even to
unify, ontologies and the object model of a given programming
language, e.g. a class in the ontology becomes a class in the program-
ming language. The W3C showed that this approach could reduce
the length of the source code by a half [25]. In Fig. 1, ontology-
oriented programming not only reduces the length of the source
code, but also adheres more strictly to the object paradigm, by
deﬁning a get cost() method in the Order class of the ontology.

Difference #5 (properties as a ﬁrst-order construct) has been
partly ﬁxed by the recent development of duck-typing. Duck-typing
is a kind of “programming philosophy” which can be applied to
dynamic object-oriented programming languages such as Python
or Perl, without having to modify the language. Although attributes
are still deﬁned at the class level, duck-typing takes advantage

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38371991)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38371991)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q38371991&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ARTMED.2017.07.002)  
