
Neuro-symbolic representation learning on biological knowledge graphs.
======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38377458]  

# Highlights

We develop a novel method for feature learning on biological knowledge graphs. Our method combines symbolic methods, in particular knowledge representation using symbolic logic and automated reasoning, with neural networks to generate embeddings of nodes that encode for related information within knowledge graphs

However, the large size of the ontologies and the com- plexity of the languages and reasoning tasks involved have some- what limited the use of ontologies in automated reasoning.

We make a clear distinction between instances and classes.
While there is some debate about which kinds of biological entities should be treated as instances and which as classes (Smith et al., 2005), similarly to other Linked Data approaches (The UniProt Consortium, 2015), we treat biological entities such as types of pro- teins, diseases, or chemicals, as instances in the knowledge graph. In our case, classes from the Disease Ontology are also treated as instances.

OWL 2 EL supports basic inferences over ontologies’ class hierarchies (including intersection, existential quantification and dis- jointness between named classes), supports inferences over object properties (transitivity, reflexivity and object property compos- ition) and can infer the classification of instances. We make use of OWL 2 EL for representing the knowledge graphs we generate and utilize the ELK reasoner (Kazakov et al., 2014) for automated reasoning over them.

We build a knowledge graph using Semantic Web technologies cen- tered on human biomedical data. The graph incorporates several biological and biomedical datasets and is split in two layers, in- stances and classes. We use the Elk reasoner (Kazakov et al., 2014) to deductively close this graph, and through the application of ontology-based inference, we further infer 5616273 new triples and add them to the know- ledge graph.

First, we re- move edges from the knowledge graph, regenerate the embeddings using the reduced graph, and train a logistic regression classifier to predict whether or not an edge exists between two nodes, given the embeddings for two nodes as input. This kind of application is in- tended to demonstrate how associations between two potentially different types of entities, such as a gene and disease, can be identi- fied.

Despite these limitations, the embeddings that our approach generates can be added as additional features to existing machine learning methods without spending significant effort to manually extract and represent features. The low dimensionality of the embeddings for each node makes our approach particularly suitable for such a combination.

Despite the large success of machine learning methods in the past
years (Lecun et al., 2015), they have not yet widely been applied to symbolically represented biological knowledge.

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38377458)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38377458)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q38377458/P921%3BP4510)  
