
Literature Based Discovery: models, methods, and trends.
========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38371706]  

# Highlights

This paper provides an introduction and overview of literature based discovery (LBD) in the biomedical domain.

Literature-Based-Discovery (LBD) seeks to discover new knowledge from existing literature in an automated or semi-automated
way

Nearly all LBD systems are based on or derived from Swanson’s ABC co-occurrence model
In this model, explicit knowledge is found in text to generate ‘‘A implies B” and ‘‘B implies C” relation hips. Implicit knowledge is discovered by drawing a ‘‘therefore A
implies C” conclusion. There are two main ways to perform LBD,
open discovery and closed discovery [27]. In open discovery, the
user inputs a start term, and the system outputs a list of target
terms. In closed discovery, the user inputs both a start term and
a target term, and the system outputs a set of linking terms. Open
discovery is used to generate new discoveries, where as closed discovery is primarily used to explain correlations or observations

Using the ABC co-occurrence model as a theoretical framework,
several core questions arise:
1. How do I represent a term?
2. What constitutes a relationship?
3. How do I find linking and target terms?


Concept co-occurrence models use concepts rather than ngrams to represent terms. Using UMLS concepts provides normalization, stop word removal, and identification of multi-word terms.

Relationships can be
extracted from SemMedDB in the form of a discovery pattern
[39], which is one or more UMLS semantic type - SemRep relation


Distributional
models are more distinct. They use co-occurrence information to
construct vector representations of terms. These vector representations
have theoretical backgrounds in cognitive representations of
terms, and approximate the idea of conceptual spaces in Gärdenfors’ model of human cognition [45]. These distributional models
attempt to approximate how humans conceptualize and assemble
knowledge

Abductive reasoning, as defined by the philosopher and logician, C. S. Peirce (1839–1914) is concerned with the
generation of new explanatory hypotheses given a set of observations.” [54


Evaluation of LBD systems is challenging. This is due to the difficulty of acquiring a gold standard dataset. What constitutes a discovery? How can one predict all future discoveries? Even if those
questions could be answered, the datasets are necessarily very
large, and human evaluation of all possibilities is likely impossible.
There are however, four evaluation methodologies that have
become standard:
1. Discovery replication – replicating previous discoveries, particularly Swanson’s initial discoveries.
2. New discovery proposal and empirical evaluation – using an
LBD system to propose new discoveries.
3. Time slicing – dividing the dataset into pre-discovery and postdiscovery segments. The pre-discovery segment is used to generate knowledge, while the post-discovery segment is used to
evaluate the goodness of the generated knowledge.
4. User interaction studies – evaluating how well a system informs
and engages users, and its usefulness in a real-world
environment.

Drug Repurposing is the process of finding new applications for
existing drugs. Drug repurposing is on the rise, accounting for ‘‘approximately 30% of the new US Food and Drug Administration
approved drugs and vaccines in recent years” [14]. Classic examples of drug repurposing include Viagra, which was developed as
a treatment for angina, and was repurposed to treat erectile dysfunction; Rogaine, originally developed for high blood pressure,
found success as a baldness treatment

BD has been around for over 30 years, but has not been widely
adopted outside of the information retrieval and text processing
community. A lot of criticism has focused on this lack of adoption
into laboratory and research environments. LBD’s lack of adoption
can be attributed to two primary concerns: lack of empirical evaluation, and a disconnect between users and developers. Both of
these topics have received considerable attention in recent year

keels et al.
[75] state that the ‘‘interface must facilitate comprehension, investigation, and evaluation of the connections proposed”. User interaction studies have also revealed that users often use systems
differently than originally intended. Systems should be designed
to support those uses, as well as traditional ones

Even with all of LBD’s unanswered
questions, it is being applied in biomedical applications today;
drug development, drug repurposing, and adverse drug event prediction are popular application areas. As LBD techniques become
more refined, they will likely become essential tools for these
applications and others

# Comments

Very good review

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38371706)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38371706)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q38371706/P921%3BP4510)  
