
The types of retinal ganglion cells: current status and implications for neuronal classification.
=================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38432885]  

# Highlights

Here, we review progress in classification ofRGCs by physiological, morphological, and molecular criteria, making a particular effort to distinguish those cell types that are definitive from those for which information is partial.

We argue that there are around 30 RGC types and that we can now account for well over half of all RGCs.

Identification of cell types is critical to understanding the brain: They specify the parts list from which circuits are assembled. Indeed, neuronal classification was a mainstay of neuroscience a century ago, but subsequently, it came to be viewed as mere
“stamp collecting.”

--> Explicit argument for the purpose of cell types in the brain.


Linguistic confusion can arise in naming neuronal classes, subclasses, types, and subtypes. Follow- ing earlier usage (W¨assle & Boycott 1991, Masland 2004), we refer to groups of neurons that can be qualitatively distinguished from other groups as types—a definition we refine below. Classes are groups of types that share common features.

--> By this definition, class and type are the same.

In this nomenclature, there are five classes ofneurons in the vertebrate retina: photoreceptors, which detect light; horizontal, bipolar, and amacrine cells, which are interneurons that process the output ofphotoreceptors; and RGCs. 

Each of these neuronal cell classes is divisible into types. In the mouse (the number of types varies slightly across vertebrate species), there are three types of photoreceptors: rods and two types of cones.

--> For the circuit models this is enough. But is it really so that we have that few types of photoreceptors?

However, lacking functional information for most neurons, we must use other indicators. At present, four criteria define an RGC type:

- Uniform morphology
- Similar gene expression
- Regular spacing (This criterion, which seems to represent the retina’s opinion of what constitutes a type, is so far (sadly) only applicable to the retina)
- Uniform physiological properties

A landmark finding was that dif- ferent physiological types corresponded precisely to specific morphological types (Cleland et al. 1975).

All ON-OFF DSGCs have a similar bistratified dendritic morphology, and their dendrites are tightly aligned with those of starburst amacrine cells (Figures 3 and 4). Moreover, expression of the gene encoding the neuropeptide CART (cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript) distinguishes all ON-OFF DSGCs from other RGCs (Kay et al. 2011)

Table 1 Types of ganglion cells in the mousea

In the cat, αRGCs have large somas and wide, dichotomously branching dendrites. Similar cells are known physiologically as the Y cell in the cat and the brisk transient cell in the rabbit.

The classic intrinsically photosensitive melanopsin-containing retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs) have a large dendritic arbor and an intrinsic sensitivity to light. They express melanopsin, which activates a signaling cascade that opens a cation channel in the membrane.

The definitive RGC types described thus far account for around half of the 40–50,000 RGCs per mouse retina (see below). What types remain to be described?

S ¨umb¨ul et al. (2014) classified mouse RGCs by rigorous morphological criteria, focusing on the laminar placement of the dendrites and the shape and size of their dendritic arbor. This exercise yielded 22 RGC types, 16 of which corresponded to types that have been defined genetically and are described above. The other 6 types could not be identified with any known type. These cells were highly stereotyped—their peak stratification positions had standard deviations of <1 μm (Figure 6), suggesting that they correspond to novel types

The ultimate goal of RGC classification is to understand the array of signals that the retina sends to higher visual centers—the basic building blocks of vision.

How can we decide which features of an RGC are invariant enough to be type-specific criteria and which it would be prudent to ignore?

One requirement for proper categorization is to distinguish canonical from state markers. By this we mean that some labels selectively mark RGCs of a specific type under most commonly encountered conditions, whereas others may be missing or present depending on conditions—for example, neuronal activity, circadian rhythm, hormones, stress, and a variety of other factors— and such regulation can bedevil the unwary. As one example, in dark-adapted retinas, αRGCs have far higher levels of phosphorylated ribosomal protein S6 (pS6) than other RGCs. However, S6 phosphorylation is stimulated by neuronal activity (Knight et al. 2012), so in retinas taken from mice using their visual systems, pS6 levels are high in a variety of RGCs (Duan et al. 2015). Thus, anti-pS6 is a cell-type-specific marker only when light-evoked activity is minimized and is therefore not terribly useful for this purpose.

--> If the goal is to completely understand the array of signals, all these states matter. 

Very few lines have only a single cell type that expresses a marker gene reliably (see below)

--> This is very subjective without a pragmatic definition.


Choosing Among Objective Criteria

Transgenes often mark cells that do not express the endogenous gene and fail tomark cells that do express the gene.

For visual responses recorded electrophysiologically, the problem of classification touches one of the deep issues of contemporary neurobiology: the nature of neuronal coding.

Initial forays into neuronal classification led to the hope that RGC types could be identified by expression of a single gene. It is time to disabuse ourselves of this naive view. For example, useful RGC markers are often expressed by other neuronal classes in retina.

The question then becomes, how many genes will need to be used to define an RGC type?
Two is not a big problem, given current intersectional technology; three is manageable; more than three is a nightmare. The good news, based on experience to date, is that two or three seem likely to suffice.

First, despite lingering skepticism, neurons can be divided into distinct types. Evidence in the retina is conclusive for RGCs,

Hierarchies of RGC types. Relationships among RGC types remain unknown; two possibilities are shown here.

--> Why not both?? Really, it is time to abandon single inheritance for cell types.

Counting counts. In the absence of reliable numbers, the analysis remains anecdotal and we have gained little over Cajal; to paraphrase Ecclesiastes, of making many types there is no end. In fact, for cell types there is an end, which will come when all of the available cells have been identified, but we can only know that by quantitative analysis of the cell populations.

--> No! Even if you measured all cells, everywhere, classification would still remain an issue. It is not bound by the number of cells, because the hierarchies are made by humans.

# Comments
It is really a pre-Linnean conception of type. Essentialist, a search for a quasi-religious parts list. 