
An RDF/OWL knowledge base for query answering and decision support in clinical pharmacogenetics.
================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38420432]  

# Highlights

Genetic testing for personalizing pharmacotherapy is bound to become an important part of
clinical routine. To address associated issues with data management and quality, we are creating a semantic knowledge base for clinical pharmacogenetics.

Our work goes beyond the state of the art in that it makes both automated
reasoning as well as query answering as simple as possible, and the reasoning capabilities go
beyond the capabilities of previously described ontologies.

We created an RDF representation of relevant biomedical datasets and integrated them into
the Bio2RDF infrastructure (6). Bio2RDF is an open source project that aims to provide
linked data for the life sciences.

Following good practices of RDF data publishing, all identifiers can be resolved through the web to yield descriptions of
the underlying resources. All scripts used for converting the datasets are available from
https://github.com/bio2rdf/bio2rdf-scripts.

During our work we also identified potential difficulties with definitions of clinical
phenotypes such “intermediate metabolizer”, “poor metabolizer” or “extensive metabolizer”.
These phenotypes are often defined only vaguely, and each term can have quite different
meanings when applied to different enzymes and drugs. We hope that such ambiguities can
be better resolved through the use of well-defined ontologies and semantic data model such
as those outlined in this paper.

We invite stakeholders in clinical genetics to participate in the further development and
application of the formalism and system we developed, with the potential goal of
establishing it as an open standard for formalizing data and rules in clinical
pharmacogenetics.

# Comments
Nice model

1.3.2.3. Bio2RDF and semantic databases
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38420432)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38420432)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q38420432/P921%3BP4510)  
