
Biomedical ontologies: what part-of is and isn't.
=================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38519078]  
  
Publication date : 19 of December, 2005  

# Highlights

Whereas classical mereology focuses on individual entities, mereological relations in biomedical ontologies are generally asserted between classes of individuals. In general, this practice leaves some basic issues unanswered: type constraints of mereological relations, e.g., concerning artifacts and biological entities, the relation between parthood and time, inferred parts and wholes as well as a delimitation of parthood against spatial inclusion.

 Here, in contrast to standard mereology, Part-Of and Has-Part denote relations between classes (such as in Part-Of (Cell Nucleus, Cell)) and not relations between individuals, and they consequently have different properties.


Parthood between material and non-material entities: Are left ventricles parts of hearts, and is the boundary of this liver part of this liver?

Parthood over time: Is a lost hair or a surgically removed appendix still part of the body? Is a tissue sample in a laboratory still part of the organism from which it was taken?

Parthood and spatial location: Are transplanted organs part of the donor organism, the receptor organism, or both? Is a given molecule part of the cell in which it is located at a given moment? Is a tooth filling part of a tooth?

Parthood between occurrents: Is the suturing process part of an appendectomy, or is the interphase part of mitosis?

--> Very interesting points. Very relevant to the representation of knowledge on ontologies.


The basis of our analysis is a four-category scheme depicted in Table 1. Distinctions between biomedical entities can be drawn on the basis of their classification either as a universal or a particular and either as a continuant or an occurrent. Most upper-level ontologies are concordant in this respect. Particulars are the concrete and countable entities in the world: this cell, my hand, my childhood, Susan’s left femur, Susan’s femur operation, etc. Universal properties or universals are entities which are instantiated by particulars, e.g., the universal Human Being is instantiated by particulars like Susan.

--> Basic ontological grounding, interesting for thesis - 1.2.2. Computational ontologies and their methods

Table 1. Four mutually disjoint categories for material objects and processes

--> This table will go to the thesis. -  1.2.2. Computational ontologies and their methods


Consequently, there are universals whose instances are continuants like Heart, Human being, etc. and there are universals which instances are occurrents like Human Life, Osteoarthrosis, Hip Arthroplasty, Insulin Synthesis, Mitosis, etc. Most upper level ontologies agree on these basic principles: DOLCE [11], BFO [12], and GOL [13].


Here, Part-Of (Thumb, Hand) does not mean that an individual thumb is part of an individual hand, but rather that the class of thumbs and the class of hands stand in some special relationship which uniquely exists between universals. Such class-level relations must be carefully kept apart (and distinguished by a different notation) from instance-level relations such as part-of (my thumb, my hand), part-of (italy, europe). 


e: The Gene Ontology [6], for instance, used to interpret Part-Of as “can be a part of, not is always a part of [23]. More recently, this definition was changed to “The part-of relationship (…) is usually necessarily is-part [24].

Transitivity and antisymmetry, however, are generally accepted as properties in ontological (non-cognitive) formalizations of part-of and has-part. 

Unfortunately, in the literature there are different opinions on whether a boundary is a part of the object it delimits [47]. Is, for example, the surface of my arm a part of my arm? In the FMA, for instance, boundaries are not parts of the entities they bound.

One distinct goblet cell in my stomach is part-of the collection or plurality of goblet cells in my stomach which is part-of my stomach.

Notice, however, that not every entity which is located-in a biological structure is also part-of that structure. For example, a bolus of food is located-in my stomach, i.e., at a given time the region of the bolus of food is a part of the region of my stomach, but the bolus of food is NOT part-of my stomach. We consequently introduce the relation contained-in which holds if one entity is located-in another one without being part-of it. For example, the bolus of food is contained-in my stomach.

--> That would be the relation if we want to represent transient cell populations as _not_ part of the tissue. For me, they should, though transient, be formalized as part of the tissue.

In other words, permanently-located-in would then imply permanent-part-of while temporary location would not be sufficient for asserting parthood

All these considerations have been made for instance-level relations. For the purpose of practical ontology engineering, we have to analyze the consequences of the above discussion for the class-level relations Part-Of, Located-In, and Contained-In, on the one hand, and for the related (not inverse) relations Has-Part, Location-Of, and Contains, on the other hand.

This could serve to answer the thyroid hormone/thyroid cell puzzle: the fact that thyroid hormone molecules are located in a thyroid cell for a very limited period of their existence only could support the argument for asserting Contains (Thyroid Cell, Thyroid Hormone) and not using the relation Has-Part in describing this situation.

In this paper, we have shown that the way mereological relations are specified in biomedical ontologies is insufficient.

# Comments

Nice structure of problem + suggestion. 

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38519078)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38519078)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q38519078/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q38519078&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JBI.2005.11.003)  
