
Biodynamic ontology: applying BFO in the biomedical domain.
===========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38520561]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2004  

# Highlights

Current approaches to formal representation in biomedicine are characterized by their focus on  either  the  static  or  the  dynamic  aspects  of  biological  reality.  We  here  outline  a  theory  that combines both perspectives and at the same time tackles the by no means trivial issue of  their  coherent  integration.  Our  position  is  that  a  good  ontology  must  be  capable  of  accounting  for  reality  both  synchronically  (as  it  exists  at  a  time)  and  diachronically  (as  it  unfolds  through  time),  but  that  these  are  two  quite  different  tasks,  whose  simultaneous  realization is by no means trivial

Perspectivalism  and  realism  combined  with  adequatism  generate  the  view  that  we  need  (and  do  not  merely  have  as  an  option)  a  plurality  of  alternative  theories  to  reflect  the  different  perspectives  which  cover  complex  domains  of  reality  like  that  of  biomedicine. 

Reality is like cheese: it can be cut in many ways.

--> funny way to put it, I'm gonna reuse that, perhaps at 2.4 The concept of "cell type"

A  perspectivalist  approach  to  biomedical  ontology  with  ambitions  to  remain  consistent  with  science  and  to  cope  with  its  reductionistic  tendencies  will  need  to  find  ways  to  do  justice above all to a plurality of perspectives on different levels of granularity. Granularity is indeed here understood as reflecting those specific ways of carving up domains of reality we  associate  with  different  scientific  theories.

Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) is a theory of the basic structures of reality currently being developed at the Institute for Formal Ontology and Medical Information Science (IFOMIS) 
at  the  University  of  Leipzig.


The  central  dichotomy  between  objects  and  processes  concerns  two  distinct  modes  of  existence in time. 
In  the  terms  of  Zemach [45], continuants are said to be bound with respect to space. Continuants  are  not,  however,  bound  with  respect  to  time.

BFO endorses in addition a view according to which the world contains occurrents, more familiarly  referred  to  as  processes,  events,  activities,  changes.  Occurrents  include:  your  breathing,  her  coughing,  my  drinking,  the  spreading  of  an  epidemic  through  a  population  and  the  chemical  synthesis  of  proteins. Occurrents  have,  in  addition  to  their  spatial  dimensions  also  a  fourth,  temporal  dimension,  and  they  are,  in  contradistinction  to  continuants, bound with respect to time. This means that if we segment the interval of time during which an occurrent occurs then we segment the occurrent also. Occurrents occur in time  and  they  unfold  themselves  through  a  period  of  time  in  such  a  way  that  they  can  be  divided into temporal parts or phases

 The  beginning  and  ceasing  to  exist  of  a  
continuant,  in  contrast,  are  not  parts  of  the  continuant  itself,  but  rather  parts  of  that  occurrent which is its life or history.

 We distinguish at the outset two main kinds of ontologies, called SNAP and SPAN, the former  for  continuants,  the  latter  for  occurrents.  Relations  between  continuants  and  occurrents are thus trans-ontological; that is, they are relations between entities that belong to  distinct  ontologies .

 n keeping with our perspectivalist methodology, we shall argue that we need both types of component: SNAP, to do justice to the world of three-dimensional bodies; and SPAN, to do  justice  to  the  processes  in  which  such  bodies  are  involved.

n keeping with our perspectivalist methodology, we shall argue that we need both types of component: SNAP, to do justice to the world of three-dimensional bodies; and SPAN, to do  justice  to  the  processes  in  which  such  bodies  are  involved.

n keeping with our perspectivalist methodology, we shall argue that we need both types of component: SNAP, to do justice to the world of three-dimensional bodies; and SPAN, to do  justice  to  the  processes  in  which  such  bodies  are  involved.

Biomedical  universals  are  as  numerous  as  are  the  classes  of  entities  treated  of  by  the  different   branches   of   biomedicine,   including   the   sciences   of   physiology,   anatomy,   molecular  biology,  neurology,  immunology,  psychology,  psychiatry,  pathology,  internal  medicine,  and  so  forth.  Universals  are  the  real  invariants  or  patterns  in  the  world  apprehended  by  the  specific  sciences.  

Universals  are  multiply  instantiated:  they  wholly  exist  at  different  places  and  different  times  in  the  different  particulars  which  instantiate  them. [29, 14]

--> Very nice way to put it

The relation between universals and particulars is one of instantiation.Universals  are  reflected  by  terms  such  as  organ, cell, parthenogenesis, death.  
Which  universals exist in reality is a question for empirical scientists, not for logicians or linguists, to   determine.
In   particular,   names   for   universals   cannot   be   generated   via   logical   composition. Thus while there are organs and cells, there is no universal organ-or-cell. We thus  accept  a  sparse  theory  of  universals,  as  embraced  by  realist  ontologists  as  such  as  Armstrong [1] and Lewis [18]


--> Deep, cool. Definitely useful for 2.4.4. A pragmatic definition of cell type. The technotype is an universal, and not a continuant. 

 In  ordinary  English,  of  course,  the  term  ‘substance’  has  also a mass sense, according to which water is a substance, iron is a substance, and so on. The treatment of the referents of mass terms involves issues of granularity, which are here left aside. 

 Boundaries themselves can be divided into two kinds: the fiat, and the  physical  or  bona  fide.  [42]  The  boundary  between  adjacent  lobes  of  the  lung  is  a  fiat  boundary  (it  depends  upon  our  fiat  demarcations);  the  surface  of  the  whole  organism  is  a  bone fide boundary (it exists independently of any demarcations we may choose to make).

Aggregates  of  substances  are  mereological  sums  comprehending  separate  substances  as  parts.   In   contradistinction   to   substances,   aggregates   have   non-connected   boundaries.   Aggregates on one level of granularity (for example  a  collection  of  cells)  may  correspond  to substances (for example a whole organism) on another level of granularity

Sites  are  holes,  cavities  and  similar  entities  [6],  for  example  those  holes,  formed  by  aggregates of cells and bony structures together with associated fiat boundaries, which we call  sinuses,  canals,  ventricles,  etc.  The  spinal  canal  is  a  site,  as  are  the  cranial  cavity,  the  cavernous sinus, and the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract

Niches, Environments: Niches [40] are special sorts of sites, marked out by their capacity to  be  occupied  by  organisms

Inherence is an intra-ontological relation between a SNAP dependent entity and its substantial bearer. The redness of the red blood cell inheres in the cell; the circumference of a waist inheres  in  the  waist;  the  shape  of  a  nose  inheres  in  the  nose.  Such  inherence  is  a  form  of  existential  dependence  in  the  sense  that  the  particular  colour  of  the  arterial  blood  would  not  exist  without  the  arterial  blood  which  it  is  the  colour  of.

  There  are  both  monadic  or  single-bearer  and  polyadic  or  relational  (multiple-bearer)  SNAP dependent entities. Examples of monadic SNAP dependent entities include qualities 
dependent on one substance only, such as the mass of your kidney. In what follows we shall sometimes use the term ‘quality’ as a convenient shorthand for ‘monadic SNAP dependent entity’.  Relational  SNAP  dependent  entities  are  entities  which  depend  upon  a  multiplicity  of   substances,   which   they   serve   to   relate   together.   Examples   include   relations   of   connection,  by  which  motoneurons  in  the  spinal  cord  and  brainstem  innervate  a  particular  number of muscle fibers to form together a single motor unit. Each motor unit is composed of a motoneuron and the muscle fibers it innervates.


A biological taxonomy recognizes the genus cell and the species pyramidal cell, red blood cell, smooth muscle cell, retinal ganglia cell, and so on. Each of the latter is a sub-species of the single genus cell

--> 1.3.1.4. Cell Ontology (and CELDA)

Events are the fiat and bona fide instantaneous temporal boundaries of processes. Examples are:  the  forming  of  a  synapse;  the  onset  of  REM  sleep;  the  detaching  of  a  finger  in  an  industrial accident.

A  biomedical  ontology  is  a  theory  of  kinds  of  entities  and  relations  we  find  in  the  biomedical  realm.  Such  entities  appear  at  a  plurality  of  distinct  levels  of  granularity  (including  especially  the  molecular  and  cellular  levels  and  the  organ/tissue  and  whole  organism  levels). 


We emphasize that our approach, which draws on [15] and applies the ideas of geospatial dynamics  worked  out  in  that  paper  to  the  domain  of  biomedical  ontology,  consists  in  devising  a  formal  (domain  neutral)  ontology  which  can  then  be  applied  in  successively  more restricted domains. In this way, we secure clear foundations for a unified treatment of reality.  We  have  laid  what  we  believe  is  a  firm  ground  for  the  specification  of  adequate  ontologies  of  the  biomedical  domain.  It  remains  to  provide  a  more  detailed  (and  formal)  treatment of the categories and relations here surveyed

--> Beautiful




# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38520561)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38520561)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q38520561/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q38520561&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q38520561/P921%3BP4510)  
