
histoCAT: analysis of cell phenotypes and interactions in multiplex image cytometry data.
=========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38637165]  

# Highlights

We have developed an open-source, computational histology topography cytometry analysis toolbox (histocat) to enable interactive, quantitative, and comprehensive exploration of individual cell phenotypes, cell–cell interactions, microenvironments, and morphological structures within intact tissues.

Here we present an interactive compu- tational platform called histoCAT that enables quantitative analysis of highly multiplexed and spatially resolved tissue measurements. histoCAT combines intuitive high-dimensional image visualization, state-of-the-art analysis methods for cell phenotype characteriza- tion, and novel algorithms for the comprehensive study of cell–cell interactions and the social networks of cells within complex tissues.

To demonstrate the potential of histoCAT-powered analy-
ses, we investigated cellular phenotypes and microenviron- ments of human breast cancer as visualized by IMC.

Fig2 (e) Single cells colored according to the identified phenotypes within the context of the tissue microenvironment on their original image. Non-cell tissue is not labeled. Images can be visualized using (f)

Neighborhood analysis of breast cancer cell phenotypes. (a) Schematic of neighbor analysis. Number of interactions between abundant green cells (green line), between rare clustered red cells (red line), and between abundant green cells and rare red cells (black line). (b) Schematic depicting directional aspects of neighbor interactions visualized in the heatmap. Rows visualize the significance of all cell types surrounding a cell type of interest. Columns visualize the significance of the cell type of interest surrounding other cell types. White

--> Interesting mix of terms "cell phenotype" and "cell type"

PhenoGraph iden- tified 29 phenotype clusters (PC) shared across images and clini- cal subgroups, and these clusters were then visualized on a tSNE map (Fig. 2c, Supplementary Fig. 3, and Supplementary Data Set 1). These cell phenotypes are present at different frequencies and were characterized by specific epitopes (e.g., vimentin, PC 4; and CD68, PC 7) and combinations of markers (e.g., prolifera- tive Ki-67+ and phospho-S6+ PCs 8, 10, and 19)

--> "cell phenotype" seems to be used as a synonym for cell cluster.

To gain a deeper understanding of TAMs and their neighborhoods, we inspected PC 7 with high CD68 signal suggestive of macrophage identity (Fig. 2c and Supplementary Fig. 2b). It is also possible to select potential macrophages by gating for CD68 expression on the tSNE plot (Supplementary Note 1).
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38637165)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38637165)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q38637165/P921%3BP4510)  
