
biochem4j: Integrated and extensible biochemical knowledge through graph databases.
===================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38678861]  
  
Publication date : 14 of July, 2017  

# Highlights

Biologists and biochemists have at their disposal a number of excellent, publicly available
data resources such as UniProt, KEGG, and NCBI Taxonomy, which catalogue biological
entities. Despite the usefulness of these resources, they remain fundamentally unconnected.


 With the introduction of graph databases, the barrier to the rapid generation, extension and querying of such a resource has been lowered considerably. With a particular focus on metabolic engineering as an illustrative application domain, biochem4j, freely available at http://biochem4j.org, is introduced to provide an integrated, queryable database that
warehouses chemical, reaction, enzyme and taxonomic data from a range of reliable resources

--> "graph database", good term. Web site is not reachable, though.

Once collated, all of this information can then be explored and interpreted using a single
uniform query interface. Therefore, biochem4j can act as a basic framework upon which more
specialised (or more general) databases and applications can be built.

Due to its linking of taxonomical, enzyme, metabolic reaction and chemical data, a range of
queries may be raised across all of these data types simultaneously. Concrete examples are
given in Results, but more general queries that may be posed include:
• What are the known biochemical pathways from metabolite X to metabolite Y?
• What enzymes would be required to transform metabolite X to metabolite Y?
• Which organisms can perform pathway X?
• Which chemical transformations can metabolite X undergo?
The following query example illustrates the structure of the database, showing how chemical,
reaction, enzyme and taxonomy data are related. The query asks, ‘does the reaction ATP:D-glucose 6-phosphotransferase (KEGG reaction R00299) occur in Escherichia coli K-12 (NCBI Taxonomy 83333)?’, essentially determining whether a link exists between the reaction node, an
enzyme node, and the E. coli K-12 node in the database. Additionally, to demonstrate to connectivity between node types within the database, chemicals involved in the reaction, and the
parent node of E. coli K-12 in the NCBI Taxonomy tree, are also returned. Note that implementing such a query across the individual databases used to populate biochem4j would be almost
impossible using manual browsing–and would be computationally tedious even in an integrated
relational database holding the same information. The results of the query are shown in Fig 1.

--> Interesting organization of text.

The flexibility, extensibility and ease-of-use of graph database systems will provide enormous
advantages in fast-moving areas such as biotechnological research over the coming years. biochem4j is an early example of their potential and can serve as a first step towards a family of
related and interacting resources across a wide range of biological application domains.
# Comments
1.2.3. Web of Data and Linked Open Data
1.3. Knowledge Representation in biology



## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38678861)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38678861)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q38678861/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'biochem4j%3A%20Integrated%20and%20extensible%20biochemical%20knowledge%20through%20graph%20databases.'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
