## The origin and evolution of cell types
    [@wikidata:Q38798014]
    
### Highlights

A new evolutionary definition of cell types is presented. Cell types are evolutionary units defined by common descent rather than phenotypic similarity, and characterized by their ability to evolve gene expression programmes independently of each other.

The evolutionary diversification of cell types is driven by genomic individuation, which increases the capacity of sister cell types to establish and maintain distinct gene expression programmes.

Core regulatory complexes (CoRCs) of terminal selectors determine cell type identity. CoRCs are the molecular agents that enable cell type-specific gene expression.

Apomeres are new cellular modules or variants of modules in incipient sister cell types that implement cell type-specific structure and functions.

Concerted evolution is characteristic for related cell types that share some genomic information, such as genes or shared enhancers.

The evolutionary lineage of cell type individuation is different from the developmental lineage. 
Serial sister cell types that develop from distinct developmental regions are closely related in evolution but differ in developmental lineage.


Key to cell type identity are evolutionary changes in the ‘core regulatory complex’ (CoRC) of transcription factors, that make emergent sister cell types distinct, enable their independent evolution and regulate cell type-specific traits termed apomeres.

From an evolutionary perspective, similarity may arise for different reasons, not all of which reflect bona-fide cell type homology due to inheritance from a common precursor.

For instance, different cell types can evolve similarity by cell phenotypic convergence. Alternatively, cell types might resemble each other because of concerted evolution, which occurs through mutations affecting genetic information used by multiple cell types.

New cell types have also appeared, or been lost, in many animal clades. 

Cell types must be rebuilt each generation and necessarily share some common developmental history.

Here, we define a cell type as ‘a set of cells in an organism that change in evolution together, partially independent of other cells, and are evolutionarily more closely related to each other than to other cells’.

<!-- 
Definition is not rigorously correct: by the first part each organism would have different cell types. And evolution does not apply for organisms! By organism, the intention was likely to be "organisms of the same evolutionary lineage"
 -->


Cell types are evolutionary units, which implies some genomic information exists is used only by the cells of a given type and not by other cells. 

We therefore propose that the formation of a new cell type identity requires the evolution of a unique cell type regulatory signature that includes a cell type specific core regulatory complex (CoRC).

Set of transcription factors and their cooperative inter actions that first enabled the evolution of independent gene expression, and thereby made the new cell type distinct from its evolutionary sister cell type

Cell type identity is defined by the regulatory mechanisms that enable and maintain the distinct gene expression program of a cell type within the organism. A homologous cell type remains recognizable across species, even when it acquires lineage specific phenotypic differences, owing to strong evolutionary conservation of these regulatory mechanisms.

We refer to the set of transcription factors that control cell type specific gene expression as terminal selectors(as defined by Hobert).

Forced expression of one or a few of these factors is sufficient to alter cell type identity.

The full set of terminal selectors driving differentiation, together with microRNAs
, splicing complexes and any
other regulatory mechanism that establishes and maintains the differential use of genomic information of a cell within the organism, represents the cell type ‘regulatory signature’ (as defined by Arendt) or ‘character identity network’ (as defined by Wagner17).

New cell type specific modules, called apomeres, to the diverging cell type lineages. These become synapomeres if descendant sister cell types undergo additional rounds of evolutionary diversification. 

In summary, the evolution of a new regulatory signature is necessary for establishing a novel cell type, which represents a new, individuated evolutionary unit within the organism.

Relatively few genes may be uniquely expressed in a specific cell type, which has important implications for cell type evolutionary interdependence. Effector genes are often used by different cell types for similar functions.

Module integration. Module integration leads to the emergence of apomeres by combining existing cellular machinery.

The two rounds of genome duplication during vertebrate evolution led to the duplication of almost all subunits in the ancestral pathway. This event facilitated the evolution of distinct rod and cone phototransduction apomeres.

Cell type evolutionary history reflects the diversification of sister cell types through the evolution of new genetic programmes, from the few cell types of metazoan ancestors to the many hundred cell types of most extant bilaterians. The hierarchical trees representing cell type evolutionary and developmental lineage histories may be incongruent.

A disconnect between cell type identity and developmental lineage was first indicated in late nineteenth century embryological experiments conducted by Vincenzo Colucci. In his research, Colucci showed that the lens in the eyes of urodeles (an order of amphibians) could be regenerated from the iris.

How then are we to understand the apparent disconnect between evolutionary and developmental histories? We propose the concept of serial sister cell types as a solution to this conundrum.

We propose that these regionalization events also led to the duplication and subsequent diversification of at least one of the cell types that populated that region.

serial sister cell types arise from different regions and are produced by different stem cells, despite sharing a close evolutionary relationship

Our evolutionary definition of a cell type will facilitate comparative cell biological and organismal research in a broad range of disciplines, from development to physiology or neurobiology, to name but a few.

The recognition that cell type identity and specific function depend on only a small set of genetic information, including CoRCs and apomeres, enables the efficient identification and categorization of cell types across the animal tree.

A homologous cell type remains recognizable across species, even when it acquires lineage-specific phenotypic differences, owing to strong evolutionary conservation of these regulatory mechanisms

#### New notes (2023)


A growing body of evidence from diverse cell types suggests that the control of cell type identity in differentiated cells is based on a flat hierarchy of gene regulation. That is, a small set of transcription factor genes directly control the majority of cell type-specific effector genes.

The key to the origin of a new cell type is its regulatory independence; that is, the mechanisms for regulating and evolving gene expression independently of other cells. Without a hard-wired regulatory programme that enables cell type-specific gene expression, and unique transcriptional responses to common cellular and environmental signals, there is no stable cell type identity.


The emergence of a new cell type and its CoRC has been tracked in much more detail in the evolution of decidual stromal cells (DSCs) and its sister cell type, the neo-endometrial stromal fibroblast (neo-ESF)

Both DSCs and neo-ESFs are evolutionarily derived from an ancestral cell type, called the paleo-ESF

In summary, the evolution of a new regulatory signature is necessary for establishing a novel cell type, which represents a new, individuated evolutionary unit within the organism

In an extreme case, one might envisage the opposite trend, a decrease in cell type number, such as occurred in myxozoans, which are small parasitic cnidarians with few distinct cell types

Our model implies that the independent control of gene expression, which we link to cell type identity, may be mechanistically dissociated from cell phenotype. 
An illustrative example is bilaterian visceral muscles. In both vertebrates and the annelid Platynereis dumerilii, visceral muscles are composed of smooth myocytes that express homologous transcription factors, including myocyte-specific enhancer factor 2 (Mef2), Foxf1 and Nkx3.2 (Ref. 22). 
Visceral muscles in D. melanogaster also express these transcription factors, yet have a striated phenotype, suggesting that visceral myocytes co-opted a striated module in an ecdysozoan ancestor2

This example shows that the CoRC from homologous cell types is conserved, whereas the phenotype of the cell is more flexible
Hence, this model is the first to explain mechanistically what is meant by the 'same cell type regardless of form and function', which is of course a paraphrase of the classical definition of homology put forward by Owen in 1848 (Ref. 77).

 For instance, effector genes are often used by different cell types for similar functions. Mutations that alter protein function will then affect all cell types that utilize that particular protein function, resulting in their concerted evolution. 
. It is evident that a large fraction of such shared genomic information dramatically reduces the capacity of cell types to evolve independently and, therefore, their degree of individuation


We refer to new cell type-specific modules, or new variants of modules, as apomeres (analogous to apomorphies at the species level). 

Synapses evolved early in animal evolution; they are not found in the closest relatives of animals, the choanoflagellates80 or in two early diverging animal lineages81,82, sponges83,84,85,86,87,88 and placozoans89

Finally, duplication of the gene encoding fascin (FSCN) resulted in the evolution of a new cytoskeletal bundling apomere in the vertebrate retina. FSCN1 is widely expressed across different cell types and regulates the assembly of actin filaments via interactions with protein kinase Cγ (PKCγ) and RAC1 (Ref. 113). The paralogue FSCN2 also regulates actin, but is found exclusively in the inner segment of photoreceptor cells and has been implicated in macular degeneration and retinitis pigmentosa.

Cells belonging to the same cell type can be derived from highly distinct branches of the developmental lineage, whereas a single sublineage can give rise to markedly different cell types, such as muscles and neuron

By contrast, cell type evolutionary history reflects the diversification of sister cell types through the evolution of new genetic programmes, from the few cell types of metazoan ancestors to the many hundred cell types of most extant bilaterians. These hierarchical trees, representing cell type evolutionary and developmental lineage histories, may be incongruent.


We propose that regionalization events also led to the duplication and subsequent diversification of at least one of the cell types that populated that region. This process produced an iterated series of topographically separate sister cell types that we refer to as serial sister cell types. It is plausible that these cell type duplication events also led to the evolution of serial sister stem cells, as virtually all animal cell types co-occurring in one region develop from asymmetrically dividing, multipotent stem cell-like cells (Fig. 5a,b).

We propose that serial sister cell types are widespread across the animal body. 

Indeed, the possible homology of some of these cell types has long been recognized128,129,130 (Fig. 5c,d). Box 2 exemplifies the principle of serial sister cell types for the Atoh-positive hair cells in the vertebrate otic and lateral line placodes. 

Finally, the GABAergic horizontal cells show a divergent core regulatory complex (CoRC) (pancreas transcription factor 1 subunit-α (Ptf1a) and Onecut (Oc)) that sets them apart from the other lineages.

Additionally, orthologous factors specify a subset of mechanosensory, photosensory and chemosensory cells in different body regions in insects and annelids128,129,151,152, suggesting that such sensory cells represent serial sister cell types


Hence, Merkel cells may have evolved through the co-option of a mechanosensory gene regulatory network into epidermal cells (cell type fusion) rather than by divergence of a pre-existing sensory cell type, although more evidence is needed to substantiate either scenario.



### Comments
Defines many interesting concepts:

Cellular modules: Protein complexes, pathways and molecular machines that make up cell structure and function.

Cell type homology: Cell types that trace back to the same cell type in a common ancestor.

Cell phenotypic convergence: Cell types that are
phenotypically similar due to independent changes occurring in separate evolutionary lineages.

Concerted evolution: Similar phenotypic changes that occur simultaneously across different cell types of the same species as a result of altering genetic information shared among the cell types.

Sister cell types: Cell types arising by the splitting of an ancestral cell type into two descendant cells via the process of individuation.

Assumes directly, from scratch, that cell types are restricted to single species.


By Arendt's definition "specialized Antigen Presenting Cells" is not a cell type.
