
Terminal Selectors of Neuronal Identity.
========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38771724]  

# Highlights


Terminal identity features of a mature neuron are often coregulated by so-called terminal selector transcription factors.

Emphasize core features of this concept in the C. elegans system such as coregulation of terminal effector batteries, combinatorial control mechanisms, and the coupling of initiation and maintenance of neuronal identity.

Molecular characterization of these behavioral mutants showed that many of them affect transcription factors that turned out to act at the terminal step of differentiation of postmitotic neurons.

These molecular markers, built by the community over the past 20 years (curated at www.wormbase.org), monitor the neuron-type specific expression of hundreds of genes that define terminal properties of a neuron type.

Given the neuron identity-defining properties, I proposed to call these transcription factors “terminal selectors. This terminology is an extension of the selector gene concept, originally proposed by Garcia-Bellido in 1975.

Identity-defining terminal effector genes are coregulated.

Terminal selectors control regulatory subroutines.

Every fully differentiated neuron type is uniquely defined by the expression of a unique combination  of “nuts and bolts,” “terminal effector” genes that code for proteins that define the functional features of a mature neuron type.

Even in a nervous system as comparatively simple as C. elegans, only very few terminal effector genes are exclusively expressed in a single neuron type.

A key defining feature of terminal selectors is that they are are continuously expressed throughout the life of the neuron to maintain the differentiated state of a neuron.

Terminal selectors are combinations of cooperating factors.

There may be a spectrum of distinct types of cooperation between terminal selectors, depending on cis-regulatory architecture of individual effector genes.

There are a number of key implications of the combinatorial activity of terminal selectors.

Terminal selectors control the expression of many if not all effector genes expressed in a neuron-type-specific manner and which define the identity of a neuron type. 

However, terminal selectors do not control the expression of all genes in a terminally differentiated neuron type.

At the time of writing the original essay on the terminal selector concept, only a handful of examples of such selector genes has been described.

The purpose of this chapter has been to provide a description of the general features of gene regulatory programs that operate in terminally differentiated neuron types throughout the C. elegans nervous system.

# Comments

118 anatomically defined neuron types 

# Tags
2.4 The concept of "cell type"


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38771724)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38771724)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q38771724/P921%3BP4510)  

# Reading dates
  > Reading dates functionality became available on July 24, 2023
 * 2023-07-26
