
A resource for cell line authentication, annotation and quality control.
========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38886793]  

# Highlights

we outline simple measures to detect or avoid cross-contamination, present a framework for cell line annotation linked to short tandem repeat and single nucleotide polymorphism profiles, and provide a catalogue ofsynonymous cell lines.

Metadata associated with cell lines also suffers from a lack of consistent and controlled biomedical vocabularies.

n addition to discrepancies with naming, cell line attributes such as
tissue, species, disease type, and pathology are not typically defined using controlled vocabularies. This is apparent even in a resource such as the Cell Line Knowledgebase (CLKB), which draws from ATCC and HyperCLDB13 to provide a centralized knowledgebase for cell line information.

--> This is a problem tackled by Cellosaurus and now better on Wikidata.


Analysis of short tandem repeats (STRs) is the standard test for authenticating cell lines as recommended by the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) Standards Development Organization Workgroup ASN-0002 (ref. 15), although there are acknowledged drawbacks to using STR profiling. What constitutes ‘‘identity’’ is still open to some debate, as heterogeneity occurs when cells are cultured over extended periods of time, subjected to differing culture conditions or are genetically unstable.


Despite the excellent efforts of The International Cell Line Authentication Committee (ICLAC), reporting ofcontaminated and misidentified cell lines is scattered and often inconsistent, thus continued use of cell lines from dubious origins is still evident in the literature.

Non-human (inter-species) cell line contamination has received less attention but is thought to affect approximately6% ofcultures.

Our analysis of cell line nomenclature attempts to address the issue ofambi- guity in biomedical texts. The problem of ambiguity and polysemy of gene names, for example, has been addressed by the HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC) by assigning unique gene symbols, and as journals begin to require correct use ofHUGO terms, text mining for gene-related information is gradually improving

--> The theory is much better than the practice, I must say.

Therefore, the combination of the synonym table with defined cell line nomenclature is designed to simplify the process of selecting the appropriate cell lines and avoiding one with uncertain origins.

In conclusion, we have outlined a comprehensive framework for cell
line authentication, quality control, annotation and data integration that can be easily adopted, expanded and improved by our community
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38886793)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38886793)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q38886793/P921%3BP4510)  
