
Tracing haematopoietic stem cell formation at single-cell resolution.
=====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38862522]  
  
Publication date : 18 of May, 2016  

# Highlights
Haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are derived early from embryonic precursors, such as haemogenic endothelial cells and pre-haematopoietic stem cells (pre-HSCs)



Then we apply single-cell RNA sequencing to analyse endothelial cells, CD45− and CD45+ pre-HSCs in the aorta–gonad–mesonephros region, and HSCs in fetal liver.
T1 pre-HSCs are known as CD31+VE-cadherin+CD45−CD41lowc-Kit+ in E11 AGM

 Multi-lineage long-term (>16 weeks) repopulation in peripheral blood of a representative primary recipient transplanted with the culture from a single T1 pre-HSC

 We also determined the inducible HSC potential from the presumed CD45+ T2 pre-HSCs in the E11 AGM region. The CD31+CD45+CD41low (T2 CD41low) population demonstrated long-term multi-lineage repopulation in 37.5% of recipients after three-cell-initiated co-culture.

Next, the gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) coupled with the pathway gene set data of Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) was applied by pairwise comparison to explore signalling pathways potentially involved in HSC formation (Extended Data Fig. 5a, b). The result by GSEA was verified by hypergeometric testing based on differentially expressed genes. Compared with ECs, there were 57 pathways overrepresented in T1 pre-HSCs (P < 0.05, FDR < 0.25; Supplementary Table 9). Notably, oxidative phosphorylation and glycolysis pathways were both overrepresented in the T1 population, implying that mitochondrial aerobic respiration was specifically activated at this stage. In contrast, quiescent HSCs reside in hypoxic bone marrow niches and rely heavily upon glycolysis for energy production.

nterestingly, one of the pre-HSC signature genes, Ctnnal1 (or a-catulin), was recently reported to efficiently mark adult bone marrow HSC

Importantly, this is the first time that the transcriptomes of pre-HSCs and HSCs during embryonic development have been comprehensively surveyed at single-cell and single-base resolution.

Ideally, a cell-type specifically expressed gene is highly and uniformly expressed (with relative expression level as 1) in all cells in a particular cell type (for example T1 pre-HSCs) but not expressed (with relative expression level as 0) in all cells of other cell types (for example ECs, T2 pre-HSCs, and E12 and E14 HSCs). In reality, a cell-type specifically expressed gene will be the one that is highly expressed in most cells in a particular cell type (while lowly or not expressed in the remainder of cells of this type), and lowly or not expressed in all cells of other cell types. These real ‘cell-type specifically expressed genes’ will show high correlation with an ideal ‘cell-type specifically expressed gene’.

So, for each cell type, we artificially defined an ideal gene with its expression pattern as follows: with relatively high expression (relative expression level as 1) in all cells of this cell type (for example T1 pre-HSCs) and with no expression (relative expression level as 0) in all cells of other cell types (for example ECs, T2 pre-HSCs, and E12 and E14 HSCs). Then all of the real genes were defined as cell-type specifically expressed ones if the Pearson correlation coefficients between those genes and this ‘ideal’ cell-type specifically expressed gene were higher than 0.5.

--> That is a rather coarse heuristics


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38862522)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38862522)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q38862522/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q38862522&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/NATURE17997)  
