
Literature-based discovery of new candidates for drug repurposing.
==================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38817541]  

# Highlights

We devised a pattern-based relationship extraction method to extract disease–gene and gene–drug direct relationships from the literature. These direct relationships are used to infer indirect relationships using the ABC model.

Thalidomide has recently been found effective for the treatment of dermatological disorders, aphthous stomatitis, as well as multiple myeloma [7, 8]. These repurposed drugs have demonstrated
that drug repurposing is a promising way to improve drug discovery.

As noted in a review and two research articles [13–15], literature-based discovery (LBD) to
generate scientific hypotheses for finding new indications of
existing drugs seems to be a well-suited strategy. Andronis et al.
[13] reviewed various LBD approaches showing the detection of
hidden connection between biomedical entities is crucial and
suggested that visualization techniques could facilitate the detection for scientists

A triplet container, considered as a predicate argument structure (PAS), was shown to produce high-quality information
extraction results [22]. However, the lack of suitable and off-theshelf roots (hereafter referred to as ‘trigger words’) of triplet
containers has hindered the development of extraction of correct relations

The ABC model has been successful in explaining how two relationships are linked by an intermediate for drug discovery [25,
26]. Specifically, from a direct disease–gene relationship and a
direct gene–drug relationship, one could infer an indirect disease–drug relationship


The candidates for drug repurposing identified in our study include celecoxib for treating ovarian
cancer (RDS¼ 0.9535) or breast cancer (RDS ¼ 0.9709), raloxifene for
treating prostate cancer (RDS¼ 0.9938), erlotinib for treating colorectal cancer (RDS ¼ 0.9232) and rapamycin for treating leukaemia
(RDS¼ 0.9613)

--> There might be some cyclic bias.

Our system has room for improvement since the success of
the system is highly dependent on the lexicon being sufficient.
In future work, we will improve named entity recognition and
mention normalization algorithm of biomedical entities.


# Comments

1.1.1
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38817541)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38817541)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q38817541/P921%3BP4510)  
