
What Makes a Good Collaborative Knowledge Graph: Group Composition and Quality in Wikidata
==========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38918394]  
  
Publication date : 03 of September, 2017  

# Highlights

--> 1.2.4. Wikidata and Knowledge Graphs

Collaborative production processes in Wikidata have not yet been explored.
Understanding them is key to prevent potentially harmful community
dynamics and ensure the sustainability of the project in the long run

For example, Wikidata was initially designed as a
structured backbone for Wikipedia. Its primary aim was to offer an improved
model to maintain the structured knowledge already contained in Wikipedia and
make it available to other applications online. Besides, the use of a central store of
knowledge and facts allows each localised version of Wikipedia to access the same
data for each page or topic, improving coverage across the different languages of
the site. Wikidata’s aims go beyond the support of other Wikimedia projects.
Its data is released under an open licence which grants free reuse and sharing.
Hence, it can act as a source for any information-based application and, due to
the large number of identifiers from and links to other resources, help integrate
knowledge from several sources.


A claim may
include an optional reference, (a link to its source) and/or a qualifier to provide
additional contextual information for the claim, such as specifying the date that
it refers to (Fig. 2(a)). 

For our analysis we used the single-grading scale quality labels in [33].
The advantages of this measure are twofold. First, it provides an overall score
for item quality. This feature was appropriate for our aim to investigate how
group diversity relates to performance in general, rather than to specific aspects
of quality. Second, the item quality labels are based on criteria set up by the
Wikidata community and are generated by the community itself. Hence, it is a
meaningful measure of quality, as perception of information contributors is key
to define quality in user-contributed systems


Wikidata editors can be either bots or humans. Since the Wikidata philosophy
allows anyone to contribute, human editors can either register or contribute
anonymously.
Bots are developed by users and should be approved by the community before
performing any operation

Wikipedia or Wikidata, where users contribute
voluntarily and generally choose which tasks to take on, an individual’s interests
may actually determine their activity and function within the project.

This is the first research to address the relationship between group composition
and outcome quality in Wikidata.
# Comments
Generally interesting, but without many conclusions that I can use.
## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38918394)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38918394)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q38918394/P921%3BP4510)  
