
Cell-type phylogenetics and the origin of endometrial stromal cells.
====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q38904507]  

# Highlights

Kin et al. apply a phylogenetic approach using RNA-seq data to infer the relationship of a uterine cell type, endometrial stromal cells (ESCs), to other related cell types. This approach led to the discovery of several genes that are essential for the function of ESCs, confirmed by RNAi gene knockdown

--> "relationship" is super generic

An immune cell type, follicular dendritic cell, is found to be closely related to ESCs

--> What does "closely related" even mean

infer the historical rela- tionships among cell types and to trace the pattern of gene-expression changes on the tree. The hypothe- sis is that gene-expression changes coincidental with the origin of a cell type will be important for the function of the derived cell type. We apply this approach to the endometrial stromal cells (ESCs), which are critical for the initiation and maintenance of pregnancy.

One essential aspect of animal development is cellular differen- tiation. It is known that this process often proceeds in a hierarchi- cal manner, where totipotent cells sequentially commit to fates of more-restricted developmental potential (Graf and Enver, 2009). Thus, the relationship of cell types in ontogeny is expected to form a tree-like structure, although it is also possible that the relationship among cell types can be better represented as net- works of alternative developmental pathways.

--> Hmm, that is only part of the story.

Hierarchical developmental relationships among cell types
have traditionally been elucidated through a series of laborious experiments involving in vitro differentiation of cell types from various stem cells. In recent years, with the advent of technologies to obtain genome-wide gene-expression data such as microarray or RNA-seq, attempts have been made to characterize the relationships among cell types using high-throughput transcriptomic information

--> The jump from in vitro to in vivo is logically ugly

ESCs are derived from mesenchymal stem cells or perivascular cells . Two other cell types, also derived from mesenchymal stem cells, have previously been proposed to be related to ESCs: myofibroblasts and follicular dendritic cells . (the goal is) To elucidate which of these two cell types are more closely related to ESCs.

, we obtained RNA-seq data for six different mesenchymal cell types: chondrocytes (CHONs), myometrial cells (MYOs), myofibroblasts (MFBs), follicular dendritic cells (FDCs), ESFs, and DSCs. Five of them are previously estab- lished cell lines that were isolated and immortalized from normal human tissues.

--> Oh gosh the limitations! Immmortalized cell lines!

The identity of cells obtained from tonsils was confirmed by marker expression

One potential problem with comparing complete transcrip-
tomes is that the transcriptome similarities may reflect functional similarities, like the expression of contractile proteins in unre- lated contractile cells, rather than evolutionary or developmental relatedness.

--> They are using transcript similarity to try to infer a mix of development and evolution. It has a super strong evo-devo assumption 

Cell-type Transcriptome Data Have Significant Tree Structure

--> All data have a tree structure.

 We operationally classified the genes as expressed if TPM> 3 and non-expressed if TPM < 3. This operational criterion isbased on a model of transcript-abundance distribution previ-ously developed (Hebenstreit et al., 2011; Wagner et al., 2013).The genomic distribution of H3K4me3, chromatin modificationmarks for active promoters, is also consistent with the classifi-cation. Genes classified as ‘‘ON’’ (mid-low: 3–44.8 TPM; high:>44.8 TPM) in DSCs had much stronger association withH3K4me3 marks compared to genes classified as ‘‘OFF’’(Figure 2)

--> Nice, I like binarizations

The inferred relationship between ESCs and FDCs imply a his- tory of gene activation and suppression during the evolutionary or ontogenetic differentiation of these cell types. An elementary inference suggests that the genes inferred to have been acquired during the cell differentiation process are likely to be important to the derived function of these cells. We first explored this implica- tion with a gene ontology analysis

--> Super noisy and researcher-biased.

We interpret the reconstruction of the cell-type tree (Figure 4) as a hypothesis about the evolutionary history of cell-type origi- nation (Arendt 2008). Each branching point on the cell-type tree implies an inferred novelty where a new pair of sister cell types originated from an ancestral cell type.

Figure 6. A Schematic Model Summarizing the Findings of the Pre- sent Study The gene-expression reconstructions on the cell-type tree suggest the history of cellular innovations in the evolution of these cell-type families. Most notable is the acquisition of leukocyte regulatory activity with the origin of endometrial stromal cells and the acquisition of genes related to hormone metabolism with the origin of decidual cells.
Transcriptomic

--> 0.1 fcoex & FCBF
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q38904507)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q38904507)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q38904507/P921%3BP4510)  
