Sequences and consequences
==========================
  
  [@wikidata:Q39725203]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2010  

# Highlights

 In addition, one cannot easily escape into high-level holistic approaches, since the essence of all biological systems is that they are encoded as molecular descriptions in their genes and since genes are molecules and exert their functions through other molecules, the molecular explanation must constitute the core of understanding biological systems

 propose that the correct level of abstraction is the cell and provide an outline of Cellmap, a design for a system to organize biological information.

nor is it useful to decry the present approach of ‘low input, high throughput, no output’ biology which dominates the pages of our relentlessly competing scientific journals. 

We should welcome with open arms everything that modern technology has to offer us but we must learn to use it in new ways. Biology urgently needs a theoretical basis to unify it and it is only theory that will allow us to convert data to knowledge.

We should welcome with open arms everything that modern technology has to offer us but we must learn to use it in new ways. Biology urgently needs a theoretical basis to unify it and it is only theory that will allow us to convert data to knowledge.

I am sure that there will be many readers who will deny this and claim that there already is a way of confronting this problem through a new branch of biological research called Systems Biology. This is precisely the main target of my article; I want to show that the claims of radical systems biology cannot, in reality, be met and that it will not be possible to generate unifying theories on that basis. There is a watered-down version of systems biology which, to my mind, does nothing more than give a new name to physiology, the study of function and the practice of which, in a modern experimental form, has been going on since at least the beginnings of the Royal Society in the seventeenth century.

deed, there are some who think that all that will be required is the collection of more and more data under many different experimental conditions and then the right computer program will be found to tell us what is going on in cells.

That a model is correct can be shown by solving the forward problem, that is, by calculating the diffraction pattern from the molecular structure.

hus, as Tarantola (2006) has pointed out in a perceptive article on inverse problems in geology, which every systems biologist should read, the best that can be done is to invalidate models (in the Popperian sense) by the observations and not use the observations to deduce models since that cannot be successfully carried out.

First, I point out that, in a strong sense of the word, the whole living world operates as a reductionist system. This is because what is handed down from an organism to its progeny is not the organism itself but a description of it written in the molecular language of DNA of its genes. All the properties of the organism are ‘reduced’ to this molecular description.

What is the Bhuddist definition of Life?’ by saying ‘Many Bhuddists think that everything is alive: mountains are alive, rivers are alive’. I interrupted him saying ‘Mountains are not alive’ and when he asked me how I knew I replied ‘You can't clone a mountain’.

<!-- That is arrogant and shortsighted -->
It forces us to think of biological systems as molecular information processing systems rather than systems involved merely in the molecular processes of energy transactions and chemical transformations.

roposals to base everything on the genome sequence by annotating it with additional data will only increase its opacity.

The correct level of abstraction is the cell. The cell is the fundamental unit of structure, function and organization of living systems—something we have known for 180 years. This is the key feature of what I have called Cellmap, a design for a biological information system that will allow us not only to handle the vast accumulation of data but also to generate and test hypotheses

 If we assume that the average number of components is 10, then such assemblages immediately provide an order of magnitude reduction in complexity and allow us to deal with about 2000 devices instead of 20 000 polypeptide chains. 

Thus, in each compartment, on average, we need to focus only on about 200 devices, the interactions among them and their communications with other compartments.

the problem of molecular complexity has not been directly solved, but avoided by the modular structure, which in turn simplifies it and also facilitates evolutionary change.

Cellmap will also need to represent all of the different cell types of the body.
We still do not know how many cell types there are, nor do we have a good definition of a cell type.
Is a neuron that has learnt something a different cell type from its naive neighbour?
We think of cell types as non-contingent, that is, not dependent on outside factors, but there are many cases of conversion of one cell type into another, and many instances in development where differentiation is under the control of contingent factors.
Differentiation implies alterations in gene expression, mediated by transcription factors, and a cell type is specified by a set of transcription factors.
In principle, specification of this set should allow us to compute the total pattern of gene expression in a given cell type and this might then provide a reduced description of a cell since the number of genes for transcription factors is of the order of 10 per cent of the total number.
Thus, transcription factors and, in particular, assemblages of them are special devices which not only interact with each other but also with special DNA sequences in the promoters of genes. These devices may still depend on contingent inputs and their output is a decision to transcribe or silence a gene

. Actually, when genome sequences are analysed we find that many of the genes are used in multiply different ways. Often a gene may have two or more different promoters corresponding to the different cells in which it may be expressed as well as different protein products produced by alternative splicing with peptides added or removed. In many cases, these peptide sequences specify addresses within the cell, or confer specific functional properties. Thus, as pointed out before (Brenner 2000), it is better to talk about loci that occupy defined positions on the genome rather than genes and then specify what we may term the different instantiations of the locus

This should become a major programme of biological research; it will not be done by one person nor even by one laboratory but will require the participation of the entire community of biologists. Which genome should we choose? Many will argue that this is best done for the genome of a moderately complex model organism such as Drosophila or C. elegans where a wide range of experiments, including genetic intervention, are possible. However, I believe that we should do it for the human genome because we need to know everything about our own biology to explain and understand our specific human capabilities. We generated an international programme for sequencing the human genome; we now need one for reading and interpreting it. Perhaps, on the 400th anniversary of the Royal Society our successors will be able to celebrate its conclusion.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q39725203)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q39725203)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q39725203&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1098/RSTB.2009.0221)  