
Transcriptional Heterogeneity and Lineage Commitment in Myeloid Progenitors.
============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q40252079]  
  
Publication date : 24 of November, 2015  

# Highlights
Transcriptionally primed single-cell subpopulations in early myeloid progenitors


 Here, we comprehensively map myeloid progenitor subpopulations by transcriptional sorting of single cells from the bone marrow. We describe multiple progenitor subgroups, showing unexpected transcriptional priming toward seven differentiation fates but no progenitors with a mixed state.

These findings implicate deep genome-wide sampling by single-cell RNA-seq as an appropriate tool to systematically resolve myeloid progenitor heterogeneity and to assess whether early differentiation in this system occurs as classically suggested by hierarchical specification of CMP cells into the MEP and GMP lineages.

To characterize the distribution of transcriptional states within myeloid progenitor cells, we sorted c-Kit+ Sca1− lineage (Lin)− bone marrow cells (Akashi et al., 2000) and sequenced their mRNA using MARS-seq (Experimental Procedures; Jaitin et al., 2014).

Cell-Surface Markers Are Limited in Their Ability to Define Progenitor Populations
Analysis of the distribution of CD34 and FcgR indices for each of the above transcriptional clusters indicated that FACS markers are poor predictors for the single-cell structures identified by MARS-seq.

Nevertheless, Figure S3A indicates that the physical targets (as inferred from chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing [ChIP-seq] data) of the major putative TFs in our clusters show correlated expression to the TF gene dynamics outlined above.

Although previous studies suggested some degree of heterogeneity within CMP—for example, identifying CD41 as a possible marker defining a subpopulation with Mk or naive potential (Miyawaki et al., 2015, Pronk et al., 2007)—our comprehensive MARS-seq screen of c-Kit+ Sca1− Lin− bone marrow cells showed that, in fact, all myeloid progenitor subpopulations are transcriptionally primed toward one of at least seven different fates: erythrocytes, megakaryocytes, dendritic cells, monocytes, neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q40252079)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q40252079)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q40252079&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2015.11.013)  
