
Inferring cell type innovations by phylogenetic methods-concepts, methods, and limitations.
===========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q40436539]  
  
Publication date : 14 of October, 2015  

# Highlights


The first step toward elucidating cell
type evolution is to reconstruct the evolutionary relationships of cell types, or the cell type tree. The
sister cell type model assumes that a new cell type evolves through divergence from a
multifunctional ancestral cell type, creating tree-like evolutionary relationships between cell
types. The process of generating a cell type tree can also be understood as the sequential addition
of a new branching point on an ancestral cell differentiation hierarchy in evolution. A cell type tree
thus represents an intertwined history of cell type evolution and development. Cell type trees can
be reconstructed from high-throughput sequencing data, and the reconstruction of a cell type tree
leads to the discovery of genes that are functionally important for a cell type

--> The theory behind it seems very slippery. Nevertheless, important work. 


However, how those cell types came into being in the first place during
evolution—the process of cell type evolution—has not been
extensively studied. The number of cell types is thought to have been increasing steadily in metazoan evolution (Valentine et al.,
'94),

 Classically defined as a group
of cells that share certain
phenotypic characteristics. In
dealing with cell types in
evolution, it is useful to
define “cell type” as a group
of cells that share the same
core regulatory network. See
also “cellular identity”, “core
regulatory network”, and
“core regulatory complex”

-->  I will try to set up a conceptual framework for
studying cell type evolution, tracing some conceptual developments made in the past. I will then also introduce some recent
studies on the reconstruction of a “cell type tree”, and will
conclude by describing future prospects as well as some
limitations that are currently being encountered.

The Cell Type Concept
Although few people would deny the existence of cell types, the
definition of cell type is a controversial topic. The published
estimates of the number of cell types in the human body, for
example, varies greatly from 210 (Alberts et al., '94) to 411
(Vickaryous and Hall, 2006). Even in the latter estimates, some cell
types that are known and extensively studied in some disciplines
(for example, endometrial stromal cells in the uterus that I have
studied) are not included. Whether one recognizes the existence of
a particular cell type or not is largely influenced by how the cellular
phenotypes are evaluated and, consequently, what we count as a
phenotype (Valentine, 2003)

--> Very cool, explicitly discussing the concept of cell type.

In spite of such controversies and challenges, research on
speciation has made significant progress based largely on the
biological species concept proposed by Mayr ('63). This concept is
based on a conceptual rather than a practical definition of a
species, because it is not possible to determine if the criteria for
the biological species would be met every time that the species is
being described. In practice, species are classified based on “the
total available evidence” (Mayr, '63), which is often based on
morphological characteristics. Rather than providing a practical
guideline for classifying species, however, the biological species
concept illuminated the essential aspect of the definition of a
species—a population of organisms connected by the flow of
genetic information. This conceptual development was crucial in
advancing biological studies on speciation.

For instance, erythrocytes look and behave
similar to each other, but their appearance and behaviors are
different from those of hepatocytes; thus, it is the appearance
(structure) and behaviors (function) that allow these cells to be
grouped under a cell type. This can be called the “structural” cell
type concept. In practice, most cell types have been described in
this way, based on structural and functional characteristics.
However, the problem arises when phenotypic variations between
cells blur the boundaries between cell types. 


One can argue that “fibroblast” is
too crude a category to be a “true” cell type, but how fine and
detailed descriptions should be to recognize a cell type? How
many neuronal subtypes should we count? There is no easy
answer at the moment.

 The characterization of the cell
type concept by Wagner (2014) illustrates these points well

Wagner writes, “if cell types are real, then they should reflect
some stable differences in the reaction norm of their gene
expression” (Wagner, 2014). An important point in this
characterization is that a cell type is not viewed as a fixed state
but as a dynamical system that exhibits a spectrum of phenotypes
depending on the biological contexts they are in. Similar views
can also be found in an attractor view of cell types (Huang, 2009;
Kim and Eberwine, 2010), where a cell type is viewed as a
collection of states in a state space.

-->        2.4.3. States, identities, fates, attractors and phenotypical continuity

chematics showing the models of cell type identity
determination (A) A model presented in Graf and Enver (2009). A
core regulatory network (CRN) of transcription factors form an
auto-regulatory positive feedback loop and activate itself as well
as target genes (TG) while it represses the CRN of an alternative
cell fate as well as the target genes for the alternative CRN

There are some weaknesses of the CRN/CRC concept. First of
all, it would be practically more difficult to strictly apply this
concept for identifying a cell type. Thus, the practice of
describing cell types will probably remain primarily structural/
functional, as the practice of species description has been mostly
dependent on morphological information, even after the wide
acceptance of biological species concept. Also, our knowledge of
CRN/CRC is still preliminary in the best studied cases. This
situation, however, is changing rapidly now that we have
technologies to systematically investigate gene regulatory landscapes for cell differentiation.

First, I would like
to introduce two concepts, cell lineage (CL) and cell differentiation hierarchy (CDH) (Fig. 2). CL is simply a history of cell
divisions in multicellular organisms. Cell divisions may or may
not accompany cell fate decision events.


Therefore, my argument is that in order to
reconstruct historical relationships of cell types properly, we have
to rely more on phylogenetic methods.

--> This seems to be a rather common approach.

n. In this way, cell type trees can be a
useful tool to identify and characterize gene regulatory modules
relevant for a particular cell type.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q40436539)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q40436539)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q40436539/P921%3BP4510)  
