
Single-cell RNA-seq reveals cell type-specific transcriptional signatures at the maternal-foetal interface during pregnancy.
============================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q40736991]  
  
Publication date : 25 of April, 2016  

# Highlights

Recent experiments demonstrate that the zinc ﬁnger transcriptional repressor
Prdm1/Blimp1 is essential for speciﬁcation of spiral artery trophoblast giant cells (SpA-TGCs)
that invade and remodel maternal blood vessels. To learn more about functional contributions
made by Blimp1 þ cell lineages here we perform the ﬁrst single-cell RNA-seq analysis of
the placenta. Cell types of both foetal and maternal origin are proﬁled. Comparisons with
microarray datasets from mutant placenta and in vitro differentiated trophoblast stem cells
allow us to identify Blimp1-dependent transcripts enriched in SpA-TGC

For example, elegant
single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) experiments recently identiﬁed
molecularly distinct cell types within the distal lung epithelium 5 .
Here we exploit scRNA-seq methodology to proﬁle Prdm1 þ
cell subpopulations in the developing placenta.


We describe
transcriptional signatures characteristic of decidual stromal
cells and uterine natural killer (uNK) cells present at the
maternal–foetal interface, as well as trophoblast subsets
responsible for hormone production during pregnancy.


ingle-cell RNA-seq identiﬁes discrete Prdm1 þ cell types.
Hierarchical clustering of the data revealed two distinct groups,
each containing three clear subdivisions designated 1A–C and
2A–C (Fig. 2a). Principle component analysis (PCA) using all
15,402 detected genes revealed the same six distinct groups.
Interestingly, group 2C contains numerous single cells together
with the cell clusters recovered from R3, suggesting these corre-
spond to the same cell type (Table 2).

nalysis of the markers
Eomes and Cd244 (ref. 14) strongly suggests that group 1B
corresponds to uNK cells (Fig. 3b). Consistent with this
possibility, immunostaining experiments demonstrate that
Eomes þ cells co-express the uNK cell marker Dolichos biﬂorus
agglutinin lectin (DBA) (Supplementary Fig. 2a).

To test the hypothesis that Gjb3 þ diploid cells are progenitor
trophoblasts, while large Prl7b1 þ cells are terminally
differentiated, TGCs we performed a microarray timecourse
and then analysed the expression characteristics of genes
enriched in groups 2B and 1C.


Figure 8 | Summary of key marker genes identifying each cell type.
Overview summary of the locations of the proﬁled cell types within E9.5
placenta and key identiﬁed markers discussed above are indicated. Vascular
markers are in pink. Abbreviations: dec, decidua; ma, maternal artery; SpA,
spiral artery; SpT, spongiotrophoblast layer; lab, labyrinth; P-TGC, parietal
trophoblast giant cell.

<!-- Very nice overview! -->
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q40736991)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q40736991)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q40736991&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/NCOMMS11414)  
