
The BEL information extraction workflow (BELIEF): evaluation in the BioCreative V BEL and IAT track.
====================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q41265068]  
  
Publication date : 02 of October, 2016  

# Highlights

Network-based approaches have become extremely important in systems biology to achievea better understanding of biological mechanisms. For network representation, the BiologicalExpression Language (BEL) is well designed to collate findings from the scientific literatureinto biological network models. To facilitate encoding and biocuration of such findings in BEL,a  BEL  Information  Extraction  Workflow  (BELIEF)  was  developed.  BELIEF  provides  a  web-based curation interface, the BELIEF Dashboard, that incorporates text mining techniques tosupport the biocurator in the generation of BEL networks. 

Database URL:BELIEF is available at http://www.scaiview.com/belief/

--> Cool stuff

 In order to extract networks for systems biology from the literature an UIMA based extraction workflow using various named entity recognition processes and different relation extraction methods has been composed. The Unstructured Infor-mation Management architecture (UIMA) is a Java-based framework that allows assembling complicated workflows from a set of NLP components. 

 Figure 1.Structure of a BEL statement. This example of a BEL statementdescribes that an abundance of the chemicalcorticosteroidreduces thebiological  processOxidative  Stress. 

 --> Classic semantic format

The  two  most  common  network-modeling  languages  insystems  biology  are  Biological  PAthway  eXchange  lan-guage (BioPAX) (8), a format optimized for database ex-change,  and  Systems  Biology  Markup  Language  (SBML)(9),

BEL  was  designed  and  engineered  to  drive  biologicalnetwork-based analytics (5,10). BEL conserves the causaland correlative biological relationships gathered from thescientific literature with contextual and provenance infor-mation  in  a  computable  form. 

--> Different languages for  3.9 Semantic Systems and Synthetic Biology, as well as knowledge graphs in systems biology 1.3.1.5. UMLS, NCiT and non-OBO resources

The BEL lan-guage and the BEL framework that integrates the languageparser and the toolkits to create network models are partof the open source project named OpenBEL

Table 1lists all dictionaries currently incorporated intothe workflow, the corresponding entity classes, and the ori-ginal  resources,  as  well  as  the  namespace  symbols  usedwithin BEL. The recognized named entities can be used ei-ther as input for RE or as additional context annotationswithin  the  BEL  document.

Therefore, forthe biological processes not used in the BioCreative BELtask, we do not extract BEL statements. Instead, we showthe detected concepts in the respective concept section ofthe curation interface

Figure 5.Screenshot of the document management system listing documents for project ‘Demoversion’.

--> Really looks lke the Scholia tables, probably a default 


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q41265068)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q41265068)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q41265068/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q41265068&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/DATABASE/BAW136)  
