
Single cardiomyocyte nuclear transcriptomes reveal a lincRNA-regulated de-differentiation and cell cycle stress-response in vivo.
=================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q41309339]  
  
Publication date : 09 of August, 2017  

# Highlights
Here, we show by single nuclear
RNA-sequencing of cardiomyocytes from both mouse and human failing, and non-failing
adult hearts that sub-populations of cardiomyocytes upregulate cell cycle activators and
inhibitors consequent to the stress-response in vivo. We characterize these subgroups by
weighted gene co-expression network analysis and discover long intergenic non-coding RNAs
(lincRNA) as key nodal regulators.

This highlights two key questions for the ﬁeld of cardiac
regeneration: (a) what holds back adult CMs from dividing and
(b) can any adult CM be induced to divide? Indeed lineage tracing
studies in regenerating hearts of zebraﬁsh 5 and neonatal mice 4 ,
show that proliferation potency is achieved by cell cycle re-entry
of pre-existing CMs.

We therefore undertook single CM nuclear RNA-seq of healthy
and failing hearts, and uncovered the heterogeneity of CM
transcriptomic stress-response

Adult CMs are predominantly binucleated and undergo poly-
ploidisation and multi-nucleation during heart failure

We identiﬁed 6 “core genes”
that were the most highly expressed in every Sham nucleus, and
also in healthy unoperated nuclei, with low coefﬁcient of variation
(CoV; Fig. 1a, b). We recognized that the consistent high
expression speciﬁcally of Tnnt2, Tpm1, and Myl2, and not other
previously assumed markers such as myosin heavy chain
genes, imply their ideal suitability as markers for CM identity.

Overall, key to the heterogeneous spectrum of stress-response
was that upregulated co-expression of progenitor markers (Sca1
and Kdr), dedifferentiation markers (Dstn, Msn, and Actn2),
and cell-cycle genes (Ccnd2 and Ccng1) were limited to the
subset of TAC nuclei in Q2 and Q4 (Fig. 4j).


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q41309339)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q41309339)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q41309339&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41467-017-00319-8)  
