
Precision annotation of digital samples in NCBI's gene expression omnibus.
==========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q41678419]  
  
Publication date : 19 of September, 2017  

# Highlights

Weintroduce the Search Tag Analyze Resource for GEO as a web application (http://STARGEO.org) tocurate better annotations of sample phenotypes uniformly across different studies, and to use thesesample annotations to define robust genomic signatures of disease pathology by meta-analysis. 

--> Site is not relly good; not much changed since september 2017

STAR uses an annotation engine based on a semantic network of crowd-sourced tags that that represent biological annotations. In all, 969 tags have been used to make 42,015 annotations of digital experiments representing 2,970,211 annotations of digital samples.
Our workdemonstrates the utility of crowd-curation and interpretation of open‘big data’under FAIR principlesas afirst step towards realizing an ideal paradigm of precision medicine.

provides a focal point and description of the whole study by linking together a group of related Samples.STARGEO.org continually downloads raw data from GEO for all the unstructured free text Sample andSeries attributes (defined in the original data deposition by the study authors) for genome-wide humanexpression profiling by micro-array experiments. We deposit the free text attributes into a database that isindexed to facilitate full text searches of both Samples and Series attributes. This search functionality isbuilt into STARGEO.org, allowing curators to efficientlyfind specific samples of interest described byspecific keywords and modifiers thereby immediately facilitating Findability and Accessibility of rawGEO sample attributes under FAIR principles.

 We found our Series levelapproach to annotating Samples scaled very quickly; in about six weeks we were able to amass over360,000 individual sample annotations among ten biomedical graduate students. To achieve this rate ofcoverage, we reimbursed curators to exhaust a total budget of $10,000 during the initial six-week period.We found that this initial reimbursement drove the initial rate of coverage and validation, and once weexhausted our budget, the rate of validation plateaued.

  Nonetheless, without any reimbursement, somestudents continued to annotate new samples to define differentially expressed genes and learn about themolecular pathology of disease for their own purposes. Interestingly, thefigure also shows a spike inannotations over the summer months independent of any reimbursement as the students had the timeand interest to contribute

  Cross-annotations mapped to ontologies.The table shows the distribution of 154,770 distinctcross-annotations across 141 distinct Tags mappedpost-hocto bioontology.org.


We used STARGEO.org to define a genomic signature for breast cancer on crowd-curated andcompared it with a genomic signature for breast cancer using TCGA data



# Comments

## Tags
- 3.12 Linked GEO and curation of transcriptomics datasets

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q41678419)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q41678419)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q41678419/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q41678419&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/SDATA.2017.125)  
