
SciLite: a platform for displaying text-mined annotations as a means to link research articles with biological data.
====================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q41695166]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2016  

# Highlights

n addition to the above examples, other tools annotate entities in scientific articles and link them to the corresponding data sources. For instance, Reflect (O’Donoghue et al., 2010) and EXTRACT (Pafilis et al., 2016) are tools that use real-time tagging and augmented browsing approach to tag bio-entities, such as genes, proteins and small molecules described in papers. Whereas, Utopia documents (Attwood et al., 2010), is a desktop application that links explicit and implicit information on static (PDF) versions of articles to the corresponding online resources. Furthermore, PubAnnotation is an online resource developed by the Data Base Centre for Life Sciences (DBCLS), which serves as a repository for text annotations. The tool uses text alignment functions to create new annotations or map existing annotations on scientific articles.


formats like BioC (Comeau et al., 2013) and Biological Expression Language (BEL) are used to represent text-mined outputs, they are highly specific to the domain and their uptake is limited beyond the life sciences text mining community. Recently, the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) proposed the Web Annotation Data Model as a standard to share annotations across different platforms. Based on the Resource Description Framework (RDF), the model can represent text quotes/fragments, links, video segments and images, which are located in a document via a prefix-suffix tagging approach that offers opportunities to mix and show both human and machine-generated annotations on any instance of the same content.

The SciLite RDF endpoint is publicly available (see section 5) and contains over 1.4 billion triples (as of May 2017).
--> Nice

The text-mined outputs are represented in the Web Annotation Data Model. The model consists of a Target - the text describing an entity and a Body – a link (to the data source) for the tagged entity; the representation may vary according to the type of annotation

 For the current set of annotations, we adopted the Text Quote Selector and the Fragment Selector models. The former is used to represent named entities and biological events (see Figure 2) and the latter to represent relationships and text phrases (see Figure 3).

 The annotation consists of a link for the tagged entity (Body - UniProt: P52176) and the mentions of the entity (Target) in the text snippet. The text is represented by: prefix – the text that occurs before the tagged entity; exact – tagged entity itself (MMP9); and postfix – the text snippet that occurs after the tagged entity.

To make annotations available to readers, the MongoDB database is queried using API requests fetching all the relevant annotations for a given article. 

To reduce false positives, we have set up a semi-automated process that enables a user to report an annotation error, which triggers the removal of that specific annotation.

While users’ annotation preferences differed based on their background, most people found at least three annotation types (e.g.: gene/proteins, diseases, organisms) useful. Everyone preferred annotations to be turned off by default as the appearance of different colours immediately on viewing the article was distracting.

Annotation data: The RDF data generated by the SciLite platform is available for querying at: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/europepmc/rdf/sparql

# Comments
1.1.3. Interoperable publication processes: nanopublications
3.2. Community annotation of texts via Wikidata
## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q41695166)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q41695166)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q41695166/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'SciLite%3A%20a%20platform%20for%20displaying%20text-mined%20annotations%20as%20a%20means%20to%20link%20research%20articles%20with%20biological%20data.'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
