
Scholia, Scientometrics and Wikidata
====================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q41799194]  
  
Publication date : 28 of May, 2017  

# Highlights
. To collect the data, it queries the SPARQL-based Wikidata Query Service

Apart from detailing Scholia, we describe how Wikidata has been used for bibliographic information and we also provide some scientometric statistics on this information.

Several other wikis have been set up to describe scientific articles, such as WikiPapers, AcaWiki, Wikilit [25] and Brede Wiki [22].Footnote4 They are all examples of MediaWiki-based wikis that primarily describe scientific articles. Three of them use the Semantic MediaWiki extension [16], while the fourth uses MediaWiki’s template functionalityFootnote5 to structure bibliographic information.

Several other wikis have been set up to describe scientific articles, such as WikiPapers, AcaWiki, Wikilit [25] and Brede Wiki [22].Footnote4 They are all examples of MediaWiki-based wikis that primarily describe scientific articles. Three of them use the Semantic MediaWiki extension [16], while the fourth uses MediaWiki’s template functionalityFootnote5 to structure bibliographic information.

Numerous properties exist on Wikidata for deep linking to external resources, e.g., for DOI, PMID, PMCID, arXiv, ORCID, Google Scholar, VIAF, Crossref funder ID, ZooBank and Twitter. With these many identifiers, Wikidata can act as a hub for scientometrics studies between resources.

rticularly instrumental in this process was a set of tools built by Magnus Manske, QuickStatementsFootnote14 and Source MetaData,Footnote15 including the latter’s associated Resolve authors toolFootnote16 as well as the WikidataIntegratorFootnote17 associated with the Gene Wiki project [30] and the fatameh toolFootnote18 based on it. Information can be extracted from, e.g., PubMed, PubMed Central and arXiv and added to Wikidata.


European Semantic Web Conference

ESWC 2017: The Semantic Web: ESWC 2017 Satellite Events pp 237–259Cite as

Scholia, Scientometrics and Wikidata
Scholia, Scientometrics and Wikidata
Finn Årup Nielsen, Daniel Mietchen & Egon Willighagen 
Conference paper
Open Access
First Online: 08 November 2017
8179 Accesses

32 Citations

30 Altmetric

Part of the Lecture Notes in Computer Science book series (LNISA,volume 10577)

Abstract
Scholia is a tool to handle scientific bibliographic information through Wikidata. The Scholia Web service creates on-the-fly scholarly profiles for researchers, organizations, journals, publishers, individual scholarly works, and for research topics. To collect the data, it queries the SPARQL-based Wikidata Query Service. Among several display formats available in Scholia are lists of publications for individual researchers and organizations, plots of publications per year, employment timelines, as well as co-author and topic networks and citation graphs. The Python package implementing the Web service is also able to format Wikidata bibliographic entries for use in LaTeX/BIBTeX. Apart from detailing Scholia, we describe how Wikidata has been used for bibliographic information and we also provide some scientometric statistics on this information.

Keywords
Wikidata
Wikipedias
Functional Requirements For Bibliographic Records (FRBR)
Public Library Of Science (PLOS)
National Institute For Occupational Safety And Health (NIOSH)
These keywords were added by machine and not by the authors. This process is experimental and the keywords may be updated as the learning algorithm improves.

Download conference paper PDF

1 Introduction
Wikipedia contains significant amounts of data relevant for scientometrics, and it has formed the basis for several scientometric studies [4, 14, 15, 17, 18, 20, 21, 28, 29, 34, 39]. Such studies can use the structured references found in Wikipedia articles or use the intrawiki hyperlinks, e.g., to compare citations from Wikipedia to scholarly journals with Thomson Reuters journal citation statistics as in [20] or to rank universities as in [39].

While many Wikipedia pages have numerous references to scientific articles, the current Wikipedias have very few entries about specific scientific articles. This is most evident when browsing the Academic journal articles category on the English Wikipedia.Footnote1 Among the few items in that category are famed papers such as the 1948 physics paper The Origin of Chemical Elements [2] – described in the English Wikipedia article Alpher–Bethe–Gamow paperFootnote2 – as well as the 1953 article Molecular Structure of Nucleic Acids: A Structure for Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid [37] on eight Wikipedias. Another scientific article is Hillary Putnam’s Is Semantics Possible? [31]Footnote3 from 1970 on the Estonian Wikipedia.

References in Wikipedia are often formatted in templates, and it takes some effort to extract and match information in the template fields. For instance, in a study of journals cited on Wikipedia, a database was built containing journal name variations to match the many different variations that Wikipedia editors used when citing scientific articles [20]. The use of standard identifiers — such as the Digital Object Identifier (DOI) — in citations on Wikipedia can help to some extent to uniquely identify works and journals.

Several other wikis have been set up to describe scientific articles, such as WikiPapers, AcaWiki, Wikilit [25] and Brede Wiki [22].Footnote4 They are all examples of MediaWiki-based wikis that primarily describe scientific articles. Three of them use the Semantic MediaWiki extension [16], while the fourth uses MediaWiki’s template functionalityFootnote5 to structure bibliographic information.

Since the launch of WikidataFootnote6 [36], the Wikimedia family includes a platform to better handle structured data such as bibliographic data and to enforce input validation to a greater degree than Wikipedia. Wikidata data can be reified to triples [5, 9], and RDF/graph-oriented databases, including SPARQL databases, can represent Wikidata data [10]. The Wikidata Query Service (WDQS)Footnote7 is an extended SPARQL endpoint that exposes the Wikidata data. Apart from offering a SPARQL endpoint, it also features an editor and a variety of frontend result display options. It may render the SPARQL query result as, e.g., bubble charts, line charts, graphs, timelines, list of images, points on a geographical map, or just provide the result as a table. These results can also be embedded on other Web pages via an HTML iframe element. We note that Wikidata is open data published under the Public Domain Dedication and Waiver (CC0),Footnote8 and that it is available not only through the SPARQL endpoint, but also as Linked Data FragmentsFootnote9 [35] and—like any other project of the Wikimedia family—through an API and dump files.Footnote10

In the following sections, we describe how Wikidata has been used for bibliographic information, some statistics on it and present Scholia, our website built to expose such information. We furthermore show how Scholia can be used for bibliography generation and discuss limitations and advantages with Wikidata and Scholia.

Table 1. Summary of Wikidata as a digital library. This table is directly inspired by [11, Table 1]. Note that the size has grown considerably in August 2017. The value of 2.3 million is per 2 August 2017. A week later the number of scientific articles had passed 3 million.
Full size table
2 Bibliographic Information on Wikidata
Wikidata editors have begun to systematically add scientific bibliographic data to Wikidata across a broad range of scientific domains — see Table 1 for a summary of Wikidata as a digital library. Individual researchers and scientific articles not described by their own Wikipedia article in any language are routinely added to Wikidata, and we have so far experienced very few deletions of such data in reference to a notability criterion. The current interest in expanding bibliographic information on Wikidata has been boosted by the WikiCite project, which aims at collecting bibliographic information in Wikidata and held its first workshop in 2016 [33].

The bibliographic information collected on Wikidata is about books, articles (including preprints), authors, organizations, journals, publishers and more. These items (corresponding to subject in Semantic Web parlance) can be interlinked through Wikidata properties (corresponding to the predicate), such as author (P50),Footnote11 published in (P1433), publisher (P123), series (P179), main theme (P921), educated at (P69), employer (P108), part of (P361), sponsor (P859, can be used for funding), cites (P2860) and several other properties.Footnote12

Numerous properties exist on Wikidata for deep linking to external resources, e.g., for DOI, PMID, PMCID, arXiv, ORCID, Google Scholar, VIAF, Crossref funder ID, ZooBank and Twitter. With these many identifiers, Wikidata can act as a hub for scientometrics studies between resources. If no dedicated Wikidata property exists for a resource, one of the URL properties can work as a substitute for creating a deep link to a resource. For instance, P1325 (external data available at) can point to raw or supplementary data associated with a paper. We have used this scheme for scientific articles associated with datasets stored in OpenfMRI [27], an online database with raw brain measurements, mostly from functional magnetic resonance imaging studies. Using WDQS, we query the set of OpenfMRI-linked items using the following query:

figure a
A similar scheme is used for a few of the scientific articles associated with data in the neuroinformatics databases Neurosynth [38] and NeuroVault [6].

When bibliographic items exist in Wikidata, they can be used as references to support claims (corresponding to triplets with extra qualifiers) in other items of Wikidata, e.g., a biological claim can be linked to the Wikidata item for a scientific journal.

By using these properties systematically according to an emerging data model,Footnote13 editors have extended the bibliographic information in Wikidata. Particularly instrumental in this process was a set of tools built by Magnus Manske, QuickStatementsFootnote14 and Source MetaData,Footnote15 including the latter’s associated Resolve authors toolFootnote16 as well as the WikidataIntegratorFootnote17 associated with the Gene Wiki project [30] and the fatameh toolFootnote18 based on it. Information can be extracted from, e.g., PubMed, PubMed Central and arXiv and added to Wikidata.

Table 2. Statistics on bibliographic information in Wikidata on 2 August 2017.
Full size table
How complete is Wikidata in relation to scientific bibliographic information? Journals and universities are well represented. For instance, 31,902 Wikidata items are linked with their identifier for the Collections of the National Library of Medicine (P1055). This number can be obtained with the following WDQS SPARQL query:

figure b
Far less covered are individual articles, individual researchers, university departments and citations between scientific articles. Most of the scientific articles in Wikidata are claimed to be an instance of (P31) the Wikidata item scientific article (Q13442814). With a WDQS query, we can count the number of Wikidata items linked this way to scientific article:

figure c
As of 2 August 2017, the query returned the result 2,380,009, see also Tables 1 and 2 (the number of scientific articles has grown considerable since the end of July 2017). In comparison, arXiv states having 1,289,564 e-prints and ACM Digital Library states having 24,668 proceedings.Footnote19 In 2014, a capture/recapture method estimated the number of scholarly English-language documents on the public web to be “at least 114 million” [13], while researchers found 87,542,370 DOIs in the Crossref database as of 21 March 2017 [32], thus Wikidata currently records only a minor part of all scientific articles. There were 16,327 authors associated with Wikidata items linked through the author property (P50) to items that are instance of scientific article:

figure d
The number of citations as counted by triples using the P2860 (cites) property stood at 3,379,786:

figure e
The completeness can be fairly uneven. Articles from Public Library of Science (PLOS) journals are much better represented than articles from the journals of IEEE. On 9 August 2017, we counted 160,676 works published in PLOS journals with this WDQS query,

figure f
while the equivalent for IEEE (Q131566) only returns 4,595. Note that 160,676 PLOS articles are far more than the 4,553 PLOS articles reported back in 2014 as cited from the 25 largest Wikipedias [17], thus Wikidata has a much better coverage here than Wikipedia.

Table 3. h-indices for three researchers whose publications are well-covered in Wikidata. For Web of Science, we searched its core collection with “Nielsen FÅ”, “Willighagen E” and “Jensen LJ”.
Full size table
Given that Wikidata only has around 3.4 million P2860-citations, it is no surprise that the current number of citations is considerable less than the citation counts one finds in other web services, — even for authors with a large part of their published scientific articles listed in Wikidata. Table 3 shows h-index statistics for three such authors. The Wikidata count has been established by WDQS queries similar to the following:

figure g
Even for these well-covered researchers, the h-index based on P2860-citations in Wikidata is around two to three times lower than the h-indices obtained with other services.

The sponsor property (P859) has been used extensively for research funded by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), with 52,852 works linking to the organization, 18,135 of which are instance of scientific articles, but apart from NIOSH, the use of the property has been very limited for scientific articles.Footnote20

Scholia provides both a Python package and a Web service for presenting and interacting with scientific information from Wikidata. 

Shubhanshu Mishra and Vetle Torvik have set up a website profiling authors in PubMed datasets: LEGOLAS.Footnote23 Among other information, the website shows the number of articles per year, the number of citations per year, the number of self-citations per year, unique collaborations per year and NIH grants per year as bar charts that are color-coded according to, e.g., author role (first, solo, middle or last author). Scholia uses WDQS for LEGOLAS-like plots

The current version of Scholia has only a few panels where the query uses references, e.g., the “Supports the following statement(s)” on the work aspect page, but it is possible to extend the use of this scientometrics dimension.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q41799194)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q41799194)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q41799194&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70407-4_36)  
 * [Full text URL](http://www2.imm.dtu.dk/pubdb/views/edoc_download.php/7010/pdf/imm7010.pdf)  
