
Molecular features distinguish ten neuronal types in the mouse superficial superior colliculus.
===============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q42004626]  
  
Publication date : 26 of January, 2016  

# Highlights

Visual inputs arise from both the retina and
visual cortex and converge onto the superficial layer of the SC (sSC). Neurons in sSC send
information to deeper layers of SC and to thalamic nuclei that modulate visually guided behaviors.
Presently, our understanding of sSC neurons is impeded by a lack of molecular markers that define
specific cell types.

. Our analysis  revealed 12 molecules with distinct expression patterns in mouse sSC: cadherin 7, contactin 3,
netrin G2, cadherin 6, protocadherin 20, retinoid-related orphan receptor β, brain-specific
homeobox/POU domain protein 3b, Ets variant gene 1, substance P, somatostatin, vasoactive
intestinal polypeptide and parvalbumin


Morphological studies revealed that the SC is composed of a highly organized, six-layer
structure (May, 2006). The superficial layer of the SC (sSC) receives visual inputs from the
retina and cortex, and contains neurons that project to deeper layers of the SC and to several
areas including dorsal and ventral lateral geniculate nucleus, lateral posterior nucleus,
parabigeminal nucleus, lateral pontine nucleus and pretectum.

Such criteria divide sSC into 4 layers in the mouse: the stratum zonale (SZ), a thin layer
located just below the pial surface; the stratum griseum superficialis (SGS) where most RGC
axons arborize, and which can itself be further divided into upper (uSGS) and lower (lSGS)
sublayers; the stratum opticum (SO), where RGC axons enter the SC at a deep level relative
to the pial surface.

To
compare the classification based on RGC axonal arborization to our current classification
based on soma position of sSC neurons, we sought commercially available antibodies for
our sSC neuron markers.

To confirm that our analysis of cell type classification at ~P10 can be extrapolated to the
adult sSC, we examined expression of Rorβ , Ntng2 , Cdh7 , SST , Brn3b and ETV1 at P30. In
general, the in situ signals were more difficult to visualize at P30, but a qualitative analysis
revealed that all six genes show detectable expression (Fig. 10A–F).

Molecular markers classify a minimum of 10 different types of sSC neurons

Rorβ distinguishes two types of sSC neuron, Rorβ+ and Rorβ− (Fig. 11A). Expression of
Ntng2 further divides Rorβ+ neurons into two types.
Collectively, this would result in at least 4 different
types within the Rorβ+ population: 1) Ntng2+/Cdh7+, 2) Ntng2+/Cdh7-, 3) Ntng2−/Cdh7+,
and 4) Ntng2−/Cdh7-.

Neurons in layers 2, 3 and 4 consist of five different types (Fig. 11B): 1) SST+, 2) Brn3b+/
ETV1+, 3) Brn3b+/ETV1-, 4) Brn3b−/ETV1+, and 5) cells negative for all three markers.



# Comments



## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q42004626)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q42004626)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q42004626&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/CNE.23952)  
