
Science Is Shaped by Wikipedia: Evidence from a Randomized Control Trial
========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q42013239]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2017  

# Highlights

Science is Shaped by Wikipedia:Evidence From a Randomized Control Trial*Neil C. ThompsonDouglas HanleyMIT Sloan School of Management &University of PittsburghMIT Computer Science and ArtificialIntelligence LabAbstract“I sometimes think that general and popular treatises are almost as important for theprogress of science as original work.” — Charles Darwin, 1865

We providecorrelationalevidence of this across thousands of Wikipedia articlesandcausalevidence of it through a randomized control trial where we add new scientificcontent to Wikipedia.


We find that the causal impact is strong, with Wikipedia influencingroughly one in every∼830 words in related scientific journal articles. We also find causalevidence that the scientific articles referenced in Wikipedia receive more citations, suggestingthat Wikipedia complements the traditional journal system by pointing researchers to keyunderlying scientific articles.

Governments already embrace the role of providing public goods for science in a number of contexts byfunding scientific repositories. These include repositories of physical objects, like seed banks (NCGRP 2005)and model organism repositories (MMRRC 2017), and there is good evidence that this promotes scientificactivity (Furman and Stern, 2011).

Wikipedia is one of the largest informational public goods providers for science. It is freely available,easily accessible, and is the 5thmost visited website in the world (Alexa 2017)

Based on spot testing in Chemistry, we find that Wikipedia covers more than 90% of the topicsdiscussed at the undergraduate level at top-tier research universities, and about half of those covered at theintroductory graduate level.

First, purported experts might be reluctant to admit that theyreferenced an encyclopedia for their knowledge, and thus not cite Wikipedia even if they used it. Indeed,university guidelines specifically discourage the citation of Wikipedia, as MIT citation guidelines make clear(MIT, 2017):

“Wikipedia is Not a Reliable Academic Source"

--> Lol

A second challenge to measuring the impact of Wikipedia with citations is that, even if an author werewilling to cite an encyclopedia, they might not feel a need to. As Princeton’s Academic Integrity Statementadvises (Princeton, 2017):“If the fact or information is generally known and accepted—for example, that Woodrow Wilsonserved as president of both Princeton University and the United States, or that Avogadro’s numberis 6.02x1023—you do not need to cite a source”

To establish thecausalimpact of Wikipedia, we performed an experiment. We commissioned subjectmatter experts to create new Wikipedia articles on scientific topics not covered in Wikipedia. These newly-created articles were randomized, with half being added to Wikipedia and half being held back as a controlgroup.2If Wikipedia shapes the scientific literature, then the text from the treatment group articles shouldappear more often in the scientific literature than the text from the control articles. We find exactly that;the word-usage patterns from the treatment group show up more in the prose in the scientific literature thando those from the control group and that these effects are large.

The underprovision problem of public goods is a well-researched topic. Since at least Samuelson (1954),it has been known that private incentives are less than the welfare-maximizing level because they fail tocapture the spillover benefits to others. Under these conditions, there is underprovision of the public goodabsent intervention by governments, organizations, or public-spirited individuals.

The underprovision problem might also be more commonwith information goods because free-riding on information goods may be easier than on other public goods,leading to fewer initial contributions.


This is because, absent actually reading a scientific article, it may be hard to assessits value to you – that is, due to Arrow’s Information Paradox (Arrow, 1962):“there is a fundamental paradox in the determination of demand for information; its value for thepurchaser is not known until he has the information, but then he has in effect acquired it without cost”

In this paper we test several of the implications about public goods in science, in particular (i) is Wikipediaused to inform academic research, (ii) does it generate demand for the underlying papers, and (iii) are thosewith less access to journals more likely to benefit

There exists substantial interest in the open-source committee for continuing to deepen the scientificknowledge on Wikipedia (Shafee et al., 2017)

Wikipedia is also used by professionals, forscientificinformation. For example, a 2009 study of juniorphysicians found that in a given week 70% checked Wikipediafor medical informationand that those samephysicians checked Wikipedia for 26% of their cases (Hughes et al, 2009).


 Our first step is to take advantage of a user-generated categorization scheme, in whicheditors can tag articles with a particular category, to generate a hierarchical relationship between articles.This induces a category tree.11
1Surprisingly, this is in fact a cyclic graph. However, it can be pared down to a tree using a small number of edge deletions. Inparticular, we calculate the PageRank of each node (category) in this graph and eliminate edges from low PageRank nodesto high PageRank nodes. This eliminates only 1% of nodes and renders the graph acyclic (a tree).


There is a natural ebb and flow to the usage of words in scientific writing over time. Sometimes this is due tothe advent of genuinely new concepts or discoveries, such as the “CRISPR” gene-editing technique in biology,or the increased usage of particular scientific techniques. Other times, it may just reflect linguistic “fashion”,with some terminology coming into vogue, and others becoming passé. In order to assess the relationshipbetween science and Wikipedia at the document level, we must first characterize what we call the baseline“drift” of word usage frequency.

--> That is actually a very good argument for concept-based searches than word-based searches

To help put this finding in context, we can compare it with another effect: the change in the academicliterature that arises when a scientific journal publishes a review article. Figure 14 compares these, showingthe observational effect from the Wikipedia article and a comparable line for review articles. The latteris calculated by re-running of the observational analysis, but substituting contemporaneous review articles,instead of Wikipedia articles, as the treatment.16These curves suggest that the effect on the scientific literature from a Wikipedia article is similar, butweaker, to the effect from a review article. Interestingly, both are notably different from the effect of non-review journal article (not shown), which show relatively little effect.



To create the Wikipedia articles for this experiment we followed the following process:
1. Generate a list of potential Wikipedia article topics of science from textbooks or course syllabi fromleading universities
2. Have subject experts check whether the potential topics were already present in existing Wikipediapages
3. Commission subject experts to create new articles for the topics not already covered in Wikipedia


Here we can see that there is a sizeable difference between the response of the scientific literature to thetreatment and control articles. For example, the control group shows a rise in the number of low-similarityarticles and a drop in the number of high-similarity ones.Since the control articles were not actually uploadedto Wikipedia, this distribution represents the baseline of change in the scientific literature – i.e. the naturalevolution in the topics covered and words used in them.

Thus,the divergent responses in the scientific literature to the treatment and control articles in Wikipedia alreadymakes it clear that Wikipedia is having a causal impact.

e have hypothesized that Wikipedia acts like a review article, in that it discusses topics broadly andaccessibly, referencing primary sources as the scientific support.  In this section we explore whether thescientific articles referenced in our Wikipedia article receive more citations as a result of being randomlyassigned into being posted to Wikipedia. There is significant potential for this effect, as “Wikipedia is the6thhighest referrer of DOI links (the unique hyperlinks assigned to academic articles)” (AOASG, 2017)

The interpretation of our citation findings could be positive or neutral for welfare. The positive inter-pretation is that Wikipedia is used to find scientific articles, which are then read and referenced.

rofessional societies could also organize their members to develop comprehensive online repositories ofknowledge, either within Wikipedia or a separate repository. A very successful existing example of this isthe Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. It is our hope that other groups will undertake similar initiatives.

or example, if we required grantees to edit / write a Wikipedia article, thisinitiative would essentially be a tax on their time (or their students’). The key question is how high a taxwould be needed, and whether it would be justified by the social benefit of the additional dissemination ofknowledge.

If oneassumes that such a grant produces one paper every two years, then the approximate cost of producing onesuch paper is $220,000. For our research we paid students $100 per article. Assuming one Wikipedia article(or equivalent contribution) per research paper, the implicit tax on research would be($100$220,000) = 0.05. Thisseems like a relatively small, reasonable number, but a comparison of effectiveness is still lacking.

n our sample the average Chemistry article in our sample has∼3,900words, and thus 3,900 words of influence is the maximum influence that an article could have. We now haveboth the cost of disseminating information and the influence is has, and thus we get our (rough) estimate ofthe cost as$220,000∗13,900= $0.56per word

 Since each Wikipedia article cost $100 to write, this implies a cost per word of $0.00025 –roughly 4,000 words per dollar – or about 1/2000thof the cost of dissemination through traditional methods.

 ur back-of-the-envelope analysis thus has stark conclusions: even with many conservative assumptions,dissemination through Wikipedia is∼2000x more cost-effective than traditional dissemination techniques.

 --> That bit is the charm

 Because our work can go beyond correlation to establish causation, we can conclude that Wikipediadoesn’t justreflectthe state of the scientific literature, it helpsshapeit

# Comments
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q42013239)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q42013239)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q42013239/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q42013239&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2139/SSRN.3039505)  
