
Application of a translational profiling approach for the comparative analysis of CNS cell types
================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q42585641]  

# Highlights

We present translational profiles for 24 CNS cell populations and identify known cell-specific and enriched tran- scripts for each population.

To provide a foundation for further biological and in silico studies, we provide a resource of 16 transgenic mouse lines, their corresponding anatomic characterization, and transla- tional profiles for cell types from a variety of central nervous system structures.

We selected BACs reported by the GENSAT project to specifically target a wide range of neurons and glia from different structures throughout the CNS, including BAC drivers expected to target less-well-defined populations (http://www.gensat.org/)

For well-characterized cell types, confirmation of transgene targeting was straightforward. For example, one can easily iden- tify Purkinje cells (Pcp2, panel 1), granule cells (Neurod1, panel 2), Golgi neurons (Grm2, panel 3), and Bergmann glia (Sept4, panel 8) on the basis of their morphology.

In most cases, these studies established that any further analyses would be restricted to a well-defined cell population, such as Purkinje cells (Fig- ure 2B), Golgi cells (Figure 2E), or glial cell types, including astrocytes (Aldh1L1), mature oligodendrocytes (Cmtm5), and a mixed oligodendroglial line that included mature oligodendro- cytes and oligodendrocyte progenitors (Olig2).

Figure 2. Summary of Cell Types Studied and In-Depth Characterization of Lines

--> Rich source of markers.


s. Likewise, we assayed the glial cell lines in both cerebellar and cortical tissue. Since specifically expressed genes are often found in distinct cell types from phys- ically separable brain structures, the lines we present here offer opportunities for the study of additional cell types.

--> Combination of brain region + marker for cell type determination.

There are some surprising features to this analysis. Remarkably, the diversity of translational profiles across neuronal types nearly rivals the diversity between neurons and glia. Although re- lated cell subtypes, such as different motor neurons, are clearly tightly clustered, many neuronal types (e.g., Purkinje cells) are not strongly clustered with any other cell type.


Figure 4. Analysis of TRAP Data Clusters Cells by Type and Provides Greater Sensitivity Than Whole-Tissue Arrays (A) Hierarchical clustering on high coefficient of variation genes from all samples describes the relationships between cell types.

--> It would be cool to run a tSNE/UMAP and see the clustering of the cell type profiles.

The resources we provide here include 16 bacTRAP transgenic lines expressing the EGFP-L10a fusion protein in well-characterized cell types, an anatomic database showing serial coronal sections of EGFP-L10a fusion protein expression in the adult mouse brain.


# Comments
