
BioCreative-IV virtual issue.
=============================
  
  [@wikidata:Q42584832]  
  
Publication date : 22 of May, 2014  

# Highlights

In BioCreativeIV, we reintroduced the GO annotation task (see Track 4)similarly to the first BioCreative (18), but providing a com-prehensively  annotated  corpus.  We  also  introduced  newtracks on interoperability of TM systems (Tracks 1 and 3),web service-based named entity recognition (NER, Track 3)and chemical/drug entity name recognition (Tracks 2 and 3).

The  Track  1  BioCreative  Interoperability  Initiative—Many researchers are building natural language processing(NLP) and TM tools. Yet these efforts tend to be singular,isolated and difficult to combine into larger, more power-ful and more capable systems.

The   Track   2   Chemical   and   Drug   Named   EntityRecognition (CHEMDNER)

The  Track  3  Comparative  Toxicogenomics  Database(CTD)  Curation-related  Interoperability  task—CTD  (13)is  a  publicly  available,  manually  curated  resource  thatseeks  to  promote  understanding  of  the  mechanisms  bywhich drugs and environmental chemicals influence biolo-gical processes and human health. To address the real needfor NER tool interoperability and integration complexityabstraction, CTD invited TM teams to develop Represen-tational State Transfer-based/BioC-compliant web services.These services would enable CTD to send text passages totheir remote sites to identify gene/protein, chemical/drug,disease and action term mentions, each within the contextof  CTD’s  controlled  vocabulary  structure. 

The  Track  4  Gene  Ontology  (GO)  Curation  task—Although  automatically  predicting  GO  terms  from  re-search  articles

he Track 5 Interactive Curation (IAT) task—Featureddemonstration  and  evaluation  of  interactive  TM  systemsby biocurators. A user study was conducted by selected ex-pert biocurators before the workshop that included time-to-completion on curation tasks and post-study surveys. Inaddition, a separate review of each system was performedby  designing  predefined  tasks  to  get  the  first  impressionand assess specific functionalities via a user survey.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q42584832)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q42584832)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q42584832/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q42584832&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q42584832/P921%3BP4510)  
