
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Micro-niches Govern Stem Cell Lineage Choices.
=====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q42776260]  
  
Publication date : 13 of April, 2017  

# Highlights

Single-cell RNA-seq reveals heterogeneity within hair follicle progenitors and niches
Adult tissue stem cells (SCs) reside in niches, which, through intercellular contacts and signaling, influence SC behavior. Once activated, SCs typically give rise to short-lived transit-amplifying cells (TACs), which then progress to differentiate into their lineages. 


The hair follicle (HF) is well suited for tackling these problems, given that the lineages afforded to its SCs are spatially and temporally well defined. In contrast to the hematopoietic system, consecutive SC progeny can be monitored along a lineage so that choices made along the way can be analyzed at a molecular level and in context of microenvironment

uiescent “primed” SCs, located at the bulge base (hair germ, HG) become activated to proliferate at the telogen→anagen transition when two positive SC stimulators, BMP-inhibitors and WNTs, reach threshold levels in the niche that overcome BMP signals emanating from inner bulge cells (Greco et al., 2009, Hsu et al., 2011). These changes in niche signals arise through cross-talk between HG-SCs and specialized stimulatory mesenchymal cells, called dermal papilla (DP) (Woo et al., 2012).

Transit Amplifying Cells Consist of at Least Seven Spatially Arranged Progenitors

Each subpopulation displayed a molecular signature of ∼100 genes whose expression changed by ≥2X relative to the other subtypes (FDR < 0.3) (Table S3).
Tracing the Origins of Heterogeneity: Evidence for Multipotent Progenitors

we FACS-purified and performed RNA-seq on 39 telogen bulge cells, 71 telogen HG cells, and 74 Ana-I HG cells (Figures S6B–S6D)

Bulge HFSCs (Telo-HFSC) were homogeneous and distinguished by Cd34+Krt24+ 
Upon anagen entry, two additional populations of the expanding HG emerged (Figures 6B-6D)

The first signs of heterogeneity were detected in telogen, where SCs juxtaposed to DP cells displayed nuclear LEF1, reflective of WNT signaling and inhibition of BMP signaling. By full anagen, heterogeneity in LEF1 was still found, this time not only in the unilineage TACs but also in the DP. In this case, however, the heterogeneity within DP and TACs was elaborate, with signs of WNT signaling sandwiched between BMP inhibition at the bottom and BMP signaling at the top.

Finally, although our focus here was on the HF, the paradigms we’ve unearthed suggest that just as the hematopoietic system has helped to shape our view of SC biology, so too will the unique advantages of the HF help to fuel our knowledge of other tissue SCs.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q42776260)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q42776260)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q42776260&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2017.03.038)  
