
The BRAIN Initiative Cell Census Consortium: Lessons Learned toward Generating a Comprehensive Brain Cell Atlas.
================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q42778383]  

# Highlights
Here we review the experiences of the BRAIN Initiative Cell Census Consortium, ten pilot projects funded by the U.S. BRAIN Initiative. 

Since the initial discovery of diverse neuronal cell types over a century ago by Ramon y Cajal (1899), we have yet to obtain a full description of the different cell types present in the mammalian brain

Cataloging of gene expression patterns of all genes expressed in the CNS by RNA in situ hybridization (Lein et al., 2007) can define broad classes of cells, but they can not distinguish cells that are defined by the co-expression genes.

However, since a cell’s transcriptome represents just one aspect of its identity, additional work is needed to integrate others to devise a principled framework with which to create a taxonomy of cell types in the brain.

on June 5, 2014, the BRAIN Initiative working group delivered "BRAIN 2025: A Scientific Vision", a document outlining a plan for the U.S. BRAIN Initiative (https://www.braininitiative. nih.gov/pdf/BRAIN2025_508C.pdf). 

7 major goals, of which the first was (1) to identify and provide experimental access to different brain cell types to determine their roles in health and disease

A comprehensive adult cell atlas will involve multiple brain regions across multiple individuals and will need to consider age, potentially including adolescent, mid-life, and elderly, as an important variable.

A study of hematopoietic differentiation using single-cell ATAC-seq revealed that chromatin accessibility at enhancers was more effective at classifying cell types than gene expression profiles (Corces et al., 2016)

--> What does it mean to be more effective?

Sparse labeling of brain cytoarchitecture by the Golgi method transformed neuroanatomy at the turn of the last century (Golgi, 1873; Ramon y Cajal, 1904). Today, similar sparse visualization of specific cell types in the mouse brain is possible by viral vector-based labeling.

Comparisons across groups allow us to identify universal principles common to multiple cell types  and specific cell types implicated in the etiology of neurologic diseases.

Toward the ultimate goal of understanding cell types in the human brain, we suggest that cross-species comparison of cell types be conducted across at least three mammalian species: mouse, a non-human primate species, and human. A complete inventory of cell types should include information about the defining features, proportions, and spatial distributions of all cell types, and this information must be provided in the context of a framework, including nomenclature, common across species

--> Explicitly suggests we look for archetypes

The importance of establishing a common cell type nomenclature across species cannot be overstated. 

All cell types within each region will likely be arranged in a hierarchical manner as well to reflect their relative closeness to each other. Across species, such hierarchical organization of cell types might be similar overall, but species-specific major or minor branches of cell types will also be recognized. 

The goals of the BICCN are to deliver the following: 
- a deep characterization of the diversity of cell types and the logic of their three-dimensional organization in the brain; 
- an open-access three-dimensional digital reference atlas with molecular, anatomical, and
- physiological annotations of brain cell types in the mouse
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q42778383)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q42778383)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q42778383/P921%3BP4510)  
