
Genetic address book for retinal cell types.
============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q43299861]  

# Highlights
Because the number ofneuronal cell types in the brain is predicted to be very large1–3, it is unlikely that unique promoters can be found for each cell type.

The retina is an ideal brain region to screen for cell type–specific genetic markers, as many cell types have already been defined morphologically.

We screened the retinas of 536 mouse lines generated in the GENSAT project. We observed stratum- or cell type–restricted GFP labeling in 100 mouse lines. 

The different retinal labeling patterns have been organized in a publicly available database (http://www.gensat.org/retina.jsp)

The outer retina is populated by photoreceptors, horizontal cells and bipolar cells. For all three cell classes, we found transgenic mouse lines that highlighted individual cell types.

There are few well-studied amacrine cell types8,9 with characteristic morphology and defined function for which immunohistochemical markers are available. We tested whether those distinct cell types are present and uniquely labeled in our mouse catalog.

The example of group XIV, with bipolar,
amacrine and ganglion cells in the same stra- tum, raises the possibility that those cell types might be connected with each other in a neuronal circuit. In the inner retina, two cell types can only be synaptically connected if their processes co-stratify in at least one IPL
stratum. Using this principle, we searched for GENSAT mouse lines with labeled cells that are potentially connected. We searched for mouse lines where at least one GFP-positive IPL stratum was the same as the dendritic stratification of a ganglion cell type of interest labeled in another mouse line (query pattern; Fig. 6c).

We then performed two-photon targeted patch clamp recordings in
retinal slices and in whole-mount retinas both tissue preparations, light responses could be recorded from cells expressing GFP.

In vivo marked strata and cell types can also be used for developmental studies. 

In summary, we screened for retinal cell types in a BAC transgenic
mouse line library on the basis of the arrangement of retinal cells and their processes in different layers of the retina, as well as known antibody markers. Because many other brain structures, such as the neocortex and the superior colliculus, are also layered structures, a similar screen could result in the identification ofmouse lines that label individual cell types in those brain areas
# Comments

-> Many in depth descriptions of particular cell types