
xCell: digitally portraying the tissue cellular heterogeneity landscape.
========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q46377913]  
  
Publication date : 15 of November, 2017  

# Highlights

Here we present xCell, a novel gene signature-based method, and use it
to infer 64 immune and stromal cell types. We harmonized 1822 pure human cell type transcriptomes from various
sources and employed a curve fitting approach for linear comparison of cell types and introduced a novel spillover
compensation technique for separating them. Using extensive in silico analyses and comparison to cytometry
immunophenotyping, we show that xCell outperforms other methods. xCell is available at http://xCell.ucsf.edu/.


--> Website up and running. From the website:

To use xCell simply upload human gene expression data file in tab delimited text format or csv (up to 1Gb). The expression matrix should be a matrix with genes in rows and samples in columns. The rownames should be gene symbols. If the data contains non-unique gene symbols, rows with same gene symbols will be averaged. xCell uses the expression levels ranking and not the actual values, thus normalization does not have an effect, however normalizing to gene length (RPKM/FPKM/TPM/RSEM) is required.

Importantly, xCell performs best with heterogenous dataset. Thus it is recommended to use all data combined in one run, and not break down to pieces (especially not cases and control in different runs).

--> Back to article:

In addition to malignant proliferating cells, tumors are
also composed of numerous distinct non-cancerous cell
types and activation states of those cell types. 

. Cytometry
is a common method for counting cell types in a
mixture and, when performed in combination with gene
expression profiling, can allow validation of the estimations. However, in most studies that included cytometry
validation, these analyses were performed on only a very limited number of cell types and a limited number of
samples [7, 13].

A fifth challenge is that deconvolution approaches are
prone to many different biases because of the strict dependencies among all cell types that are inferred. This
could highly affect reliability when analyzing tumor
samples, which are prone to form non-conventional expression profiles. A sixth problem comes with inferring
an increasing number of closely related cell types [10].

To generate our compendium of gene signatures for cell
types, we collected gene expression profiles from six
sources: the FANTOM5 project, from which we annotated 719 samples from 39 cell types analyzed by the
Cap Analysis Gene Expression (CAGE) technique [17];
the ENCODE project, from which we annotated 115
samples from 17 cell types analyzed by RNA-seq [18];
the Blueprint project, from which we annotated 144
samples from 28 cell types analyzed by RNA-seq [19];
the IRIS project, from which we annotated 95 samples
from 13 cell types analyzed by Affymetrix microarrays
[20]; the Novershtern et al. [21] study, from which we
annotated 180 samples from 24 cell types analyzed by
Affymetrix microarrays; and the Human Primary Cells
Atlas (HPCA), a collection of Affymetrix microarrays
composed of many different Gene Expression Omnibus
(GEO) datasets, from which we annotated 569 samples
from 41 cell types [22] (Fig. 1a). Altogether we collected
and curated gene expression profiles from 1822 samples
of pure cell types, annotated to 64 distinct cell types and
cell subsets (Fig. 1b; Additional file 1)

Of those, 54 cell types were found in at least two of these data sources. 

--> A variety of sources, each calling a cell type a different thing. Might be good. Might be bad.


For each data source independently we identified genes that are overexpressed in one cell type compared to all other cell types. We applied different
thresholds for choosing sets of genes to represent the
cell type gene signatures; hence, from each source, we
generated dozens of signatures per cell type. This
scheme yielded 6573 gene signatures corresponding to
64 cell types. Importantly, since our primary aim is to
develop a tool for studying the cellular heterogeneity in
the tumor microenvironment, we applied a methodology
we previously developed [16] to filter out genes that tend
to be overexpressed in a set of 634 carcinoma cell lines
from the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) [23].

--> Well, that introduces a bias


The simulations also revealed another limitation of the
raw scores: closely related cell types tend to have correlating scores (Additional file 2: Figure S5). That is, scores
may show enrichment for a cell type due to a “spillover
effect” between closely related cell types. This problem
mimics the spillover problem in flow cytometry, in
which fluorescent signals correlate with each other due
to spectrum overlaps. Inspired by the compensation
method used in flow cytometry studies [25], we leveraged our simulations to generate a spillover matrix that
allows correcting for correlations between cell types. 

--> Hmm, that is very complex. Without a definition of cell type, this is a real slippery ground.

Importantly,
our compensation technique was able to completely remove associations between cell types, while previously
published signatures showed considerate dependencies
between closely related cell types, such as between CD8+
T cells and NK cells (Additional file 2: Figure S8)

xCell also outperformed CIBERSORT in all comparable cell types, across all data sources

--> Well, they always claim that.

In addition to the simulated mixture analysis, we compared our estimates for cell type enrichments from gene
expression profiles with mass spectrometry (CyTOF)
immunophenotyping

--> Same cell type names, essentially different cell type definitions.

The main disadvantage of gene signatures is that they
do not discriminate between closely related cell types
well, though it is not clear how well other methods distinguish between such cell types [10]. Our method takes
this into account and uses a novel technique, inspired by
flow cytometry analyses, to remove such dependencies
between closely related cell types

All samples were manually annotated to 64 cell types
(Additional file 1).

# Comments

Interesting list of cell types in figure 1B (partial 3.1.2)

500 citations!  Wow, this is indeed widely cited.

Additional Table 1 shows a nice list of cell types 

Add. Table 3 and 5 have "signature gene sets" which might be interesting for 3.1.2

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q46377913)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q46377913)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q46377913/P921%3BP4510)  
