
Improved annotation of the insect vector of citrus greening disease: biocuration by a diverse genomics community.
=================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q46758174]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2017  

# Highlights

The Asian citrus psyllid (Diaphorina citri Kuwayama) is the insect vector of the bacterium Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus (CLas), the pathogen associated with citrus Huanglongbing (HLB, citrus greening)

s. A draft assembly of the D. citri genome has been generated and annotated with automated pipelines. However, knowledge transfer from well-curated reference genomes such as that of Drosophila melanogaster to newly sequenced ones is challenging

we manually curated several gene families with a focus on genes that have key functional roles in D. citri biology and CLas interactions. This community effort produced 530 manually curated gene models across developmental, physiological, RNAi regulatory and immunity-related pathways. 

 In order to develop biocuration as a training experience, we included undergraduate and graduate students from multiple institutions, as well as experienced annotators from the insect genomics research community. 

 HLB is the most destructive and economically important disease of citrus, with practically all commercial citrus species and cultivars susceptible to CLas infection

Infected trees yield premature, bitter and misshapen fruit that is unmarketable. In addition, tree death follows 5–10 years after initial infection

Manual curation improves the quality of gene annotation and establishing a ‘version controlled’ OGS provides a set of high quality, well-documented genes for the entire research community.

Manual curation of the D. citri (NCBI-Diaci1.1) draft genome assembly was undertaken to improve the quality of automated annotations (Supplementary Table S2) produced by the Maker (Maker v1.1) and NCBI pipelines (NCBI v100). This community-based manual annotation was focused on immunity-related genes as targets for ACP control.

Beyond the problem of scale, curators require insights from others with expertise in specific gene families, which makes the process of curation inherently collaborative. Mobilizing groups of researchers to focus on these specific and manageable areas is more likely to distill the most pertinent and valuable knowledge from genome analysis.


The i5k Workspace@NAL (51) was selected as the platform for collaborative gene model curation as it is used widely by expert annotators from the insect genomics community. 

The initial training workshop was structured to provide a review of principles associated with identification of specific genes by comparison to orthologs, gene structural aspects, how to search the genome for targets of interest, and using the combination of gene predictions and additional evidence tracks (Supplementary Table S3)
to correct gene models with the Apollo platform. 

Manual curation was incorporated into a bioinformatics class in 2016 by one of the authors (Benoit) at the University of Cincinnati. Specifically, 1 week in the class was utilized for genome annotation through the i5k genome annotation workspace for 22 students. 

Immune gene pathways and gene counts in ACP, pea aphid and whitefly

The reduction in the immunity genes is also observed in other hemipteran insect genomes such as A. pisum (77), Pediculushumanus (89), Bactericera cockerelli (90), Rhodniusprolixus (91) and Bemisiatabaci (92). The reduction of immunity-related genes in these insects has been attributed to association with their endosymbionts, which sometimes complement the immunity of the insects (111, 112).

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q46758174)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q46758174)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q46758174&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/DATABASE/BAX032)  
