
Cross-Laboratory Analysis of Brain Cell Type Transcriptomes with Applications to Interpretation of Bulk Tissue Data.
====================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q47093532]  
  
Publication date : 30 of November, 2017  

# Highlights

e compiled a cross-laboratory database of mouse brain cell type-specific transcriptomes from 36 major cell types from across the mammalian brain using rigorously curated published data from pooled cell type microarray and single-cell RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) studies. 

During the last decade, targeted purification of cell types of interest followed by gene expression profiling has been applied to many cell types in the brain. Such studies, targeted towards well-characterized cell types, have greatly promoted our understanding of the functional and molecular diversity of these cells (Chung et al., 2005; Cahoy et al., 2008; Doyle et al., 2008). 

 We further show that the identified markers are applicable for the analysis of human brain and demonstrate the usage of marker genes in the analysis of bulk tissue data via the summarization of their expression into marker gene profiles (MGPs), which can be cautiously interpreted as correlates of cell type proportion. Finally, we made both the cell type expression profiles and marker sets available to the research community at www.neuroexpresso.org.

However, the expression level of Ank1 in the RNA-seq data is higher in FS Basket cells than in any other cell type from this data source, and thus, based on the soft intersection criterion, Ank1 is considered as a marker of FS Basket cells in our final MGS. For genes and cell types that were only represent by one data source, the selection was based on this data source only.



A key input to our search for marker genes is expression data from purified pooled brain cell types and single cells. Expanding on work from Okaty et al. (2011), we assembled and curated a database of cell type-specific expression profiles from published data (see Materials and Methods; Fig. 1A). 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q47093532)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47093532)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q47093532&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0212-17.2017)  
