
ALE: automated label extraction from GEO metadata.
==================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q47104084]  
  
Publication date : 28 of December, 2017  

# Highlights

Thus, classification of experiments for meta-analysis by factors such as gender, age of the sample donor, and tissue of origin is not feasible without assigning labels to the experiments. Automated approaches are preferable for this, primarily because of the size and volume of the data to be processed, but also because it ensures standardization and consistency. 

In order to ameliorate the lack of available labels for these data sets, we first extract labels from the textual metadata for each GEO RNA dataset and evaluate the performance against a gold standard of manually curated labels.

As GEO continues to grow rapidly in size, it remains a relevant and important source of data even as the biomedical research community shifts from array-based to sequencing-based approaches.

Furthermore, in compiling our gold-standard for annotation of GEO records, we found 86% of metadata descriptors contained tissue information provided by the investigator, while only 26 and 21% contained gender and age information respectively.


Various methods have been developed to infer labels from GEO for downstream meta-analysis or other large-scale uses of GEO data whereby the sheer volume of samples makes it infeasible to manually curate labels for all samples. Crowdsourcing is one means of doing this cheaply, but will require continued effort as new data comes out [3].


The database yielded from this work (MetaSRA) was created using a slightly different set of algorithms in order to achieve a goal similar to the GEO metadata projects. First, they structure the database schema similarly to the schema in the ENCODE project [8]. The MetaSRA system is constructed by mapping terms to ontologies, which is comparable to the methods used within the work we present here; however, the MetaSRA system uses filtering mechanisms for the mapped ontologies which delineate term mentions vs. term mappings.

Similarly, extraction of age was also performed using regular expressions; however, in this case, the regular expression also attempts to extract the units in text such as “age: 29 y”, “age (mo): 520”, etc. 

Illustration of matched terms in BRENDA ontology. Created with the visualization package in bioportal.bioontology.org 

To extract metadata labels from GEO, our system uses both the textual metadata provided by the investigator with each sample, and the sample’s expression data itself. 

Tissue label extraction performance is evaluated in terms of micro- and macro- precision and recall, whereby micro-averaging will be the overall precision/recall across all predictions, not taking into account label imbalance 

Although we have not assessed performance on other label types, the code library for label extraction provides generic methods for extracting labels from any ontology in Open Biomedical Ontology (OBO) format.

Thus, by combining the two approaches, we retrieve accurate labels without sacrificing too many samples (maintaining precision and improving recall), greatly enhancing the ease by which large scale analysis can be performed using GEO data spanning across many studies.

The code for label extraction, along with the database of extracted labels, is available at http://github.com/wrenlab/label-extraction.
# Comments

## Tags

- 3.12 Linked GEO and curation of transcriptomics datasets

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q47104084)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47104084)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q47104084/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q47104084&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/S12859-017-1888-1)  
