
Biotea: semantics for Pubmed Central.
=====================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q47191940]  
  
Publication date : 02 of January, 2018  

# Highlights

One approach to facilitate reuse of the scientific literature is to structure this information as linked data using standardized web technologies.

In this paper we present the second version of Biotea, a semantic, linked data version of the open-access subset of PubMed Central that has been enhanced with specialized annotation pipelines that uses existing infrastructure from the National Center for Biomedical Ontology

Our datasets, methods and techniques are available at http://biotea.github.io.

--> From website:
he NCBO Annotator is part of the BioPortal platform, it provides access to more than 350 ontologies and terminologies. The NCBO annotator makes it possible to semantically annotate text by recognizing the entities and establishing a link to an ontology. When doing ontology-based indexing, one might use these annotations to ’bring together’ the data elements from different resources. The NCBO Annotator is based on Mgrep; it recognises and associates expressions in the text with unique concepts from biomedical ontologies. The NCBO Annotator utilizes to its advantage the hierarchy in the vocabularies used for the association.


In this paper we present Biotea, our contribution to semantic publishing. In the Biotea project, we have semantically represented and annotated the full-text open-access subset of PubMed Central (PMC) (NCBI, 2017c)

We are reusing existing ontologies in order to represent, title, authors, journal, sections, subsections and paragraphs and, the domain knowledge, e.g., diseases, chemical compounds, reagents, drugs, etc. We identify meaningful elements, e.g., biomolecules, chemical reagents, drugs, diseases, and other biomedical entities, within the content and represent these as semantic annotations


The overall RDFization process has two main sub processes, namely, the Publication Parsing and Semantic Enrichment processes. The Publication Parsing RDFizes metadata, references, structure and content (Biotea, 2017i) while the Semantic Enrichment process uses Named Entity Recognition (NER) systems to identify expressions and terminology related to biomedical ontologies that are then RDFized as annotations (Biotea, 2017i)

The Biotea projects are all MAVEN projects so dependencies are downloaded automatically; the software is available at https://github.com/biotea (JAVA 1.8 is required)

. We are using 20 domain ontologies from Bioportal to support the annotation, the ontologies are listed at (Biotea, 2017c). 

--> Many different ontologies, each with a different organizational structure.


 The NCBO Annotator is based on Mgrep (Dai et al., 2008); it recognizes and associates expressions in the text with unique concepts from biomedical ontologies. The NCBO Annotator utilizes to its advantage the hierarchy in the vocabularies used for the association.

 We are modeling relations to other resources representing the same entity as owl:sameAs


 We are now supporting human annotations coming from Hyphothesis (http://hypothes.is; Hypothesis Project, 2017). Hyphothesis is an open source web based annotation platform; it allows us to annotate PDFs as well as HTML. We have integrated http://hypothes.is into the LENS Reader interface (Schekman, Watt & Weigel, 2013); this user interface makes it possible for us to load JATS/XML from the PMC collection of documents and render it as HTML. The integration between Hypothesis and LENS delivers a unified user experience (UX); researchers load the integrated interface, log in the annotator and then annotation is a simple process of selecting text and annotating. Annotations coming from our instance of Hypothesis become part of the annotation cloud for the document via an identifier, e.g., DOI or PMC. The annotator is modeled as a foaf:Person who has a foaf:mbox. We are currently supporting only annotations from predefined vocabularies; Fig. 6 illustrates the interface, an online demo with LENS and Hyphothesis is available at Biotea (2017f).

 --> - 3.2.2.1. ANN !!!! Link is broken, though :(

This new version of the dataset makes it possible for researchers to generate annotations using the AO or the OADM models; furthermore, annotations can now be generated from either XML or RDF files. The resulting dataset is over 150 Gigabytes in size and covers 7,407 journals. Our model uses domain ontologies that are widely used in biomedical databases; these databases have endpoints exposing their content as RDF and linked data.

The current version of Biotea was not annotated with Whatizit (Rebholz-Schuhmann et al., 2008) because it is no longer available. This limits the knowledge encoded in our annotations as we are missing WhatIzit annotations pipelines such as those for UMLS diseases and UniProtKB proteins.
# Comments

## Tags
- 1.1.3. Interoperable publication processes: nanopublications 
- 3.2.1. Pilot: Annotation of the Human Cell Atlas corpus
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q47191940)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47191940)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q47191940/P921%3BP4510)  
