
Lineage-dependent spatial and functional organization of the mammalian enteric nervous system.
==============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q47320490]  
  
Publication date : 01 of May, 2017  

# Highlights

Lasrado et al. used single-cell transcriptomics and mosaic mutagenesis to follow how the enteric nervous system is built in mice. Overlapping expression of regulatory programs supports dynamic determination of cell fates, with the developing neurons organized by clonal lineages.

The spatial configuration of ENS clones depends on proliferation-driven local interactions of ENS progenitors with lineally unrelated neuroectodermal cells,

This group extended into a diffuse cell popula-tion marked by expression of the neuron-specificgenesTubb3andElavl4(Fig. 2A).RetandPhox2B,which are activated in early ENS progenitors butmaintained specifically in enteric neurons (16),were also associated with this neurogenic trajec-tory (Fig. 2A). 

ierarchical clustering of ENCC transcriptomeshighlighted the close relationship betweenSox10/Erbb3andFabp7/Plp1genes and subdivided theENCC population into three clusters 

. Toexamine this, live preparations of myentericplexus from SER93|Confetti mice (induced withtamoxifen at E12.5) were loaded with the calciumindicator Fluo-4, and intracellular [Ca2+]tracingsof sister and lineally unrelated neurons werecompared following subtle electrical stimula-tion of interganglionic connectives (Fig. 5, A toC, and fig. S7). Notably, more synchronous Ca2+responses were detected between RFP+sisterneuron pairs relative to the nonlabeled controlcells (Fig. 5, D to F).

Therefore, clonallyrelated enteric neurons respond to activationsignals in a more synchronized manner relativeto their nonlineally related counterparts.

--> What is the mechanism?

Despite these limitations, allocation of lineallyrelated enteric neurons into parallel and over-lapping clonal units provides an opportunity tointegrate the physiological activity of neuronalensembles along the longitudinal and radial axisof the gut and contributes to the functional in-tegration of the ENS.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q47320490)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47320490)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q47320490/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q47320490&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.AAM7511)  
