
Artificial intelligence in neurodegenerative disease research: use of IBM Watson to identify additional RNA-binding proteins altered in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
======================================================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q47406275]  
  
Publication date : 13 of November, 2017  

# Highlights

 We used IBM  Watson® to sieve through all RBPs in the genome and identify new RBPs linked to ALS (ALS-RBPs). IBM Watson extracted features from pub-lished literature to create semantic similarities and identify new connections between entities of interest. IBM Watson analyzed all published abstracts of previously known ALS-RBPs, and applied that text-based knowledge to all RBPs in the genome, ranking them by semantic similarity to the known set.

 The number of RBPs currently associated with ALS represents a small fraction of the total RBPs, as a recent report identified 1542 putative RBPs in the human genome [21].

 o test the model generation by Watson, we first performed a leave-one-out (LOO) cross-validation to demonstrate the predictive power of Watson using the 11 known ALS-linked RBPs. To do so, the graph diffusion algorithm was applied 11 times based on the same distance matrix, but each time a different known RBP was taken out of the positive set and placed into the candidate set

 e validated the top-ten-ranked RBPs using immunohis-tochemistry (IHC) of lumbar spinal cord and cerebellum from SALS, C9-ALS and non-neurologic disease controls. RBM45 and MTHFSD were previously shown to be altered in ALS spinal cord using a similar IHC approach [10,  37]. The recent discovery of G4C2 repeat foci in the cerebellum [2], along with global splicing changes in both SALS and C9-ALS cerebellum [44] prompted us to examine potential RBP changes in the cerebellum.

 --> Cool, experimentation

 Table 4   Literature summary of top-ten-ranked RBPs
--> Nice descriptive work

To further confirm IBM Watson’s top-ranked RBPs, we measured their transcriptional levels in total RNA from spi-nal cord and cerebellum of ALS patients and non-neurologic disease controls (Fig. 6).

--> Experiments done with quite some bias

If we make a very conservative estimate and assume that 20% of all RBPs (293 out of 1467) are altered, then the significance of the Watson predictions is p = 7.21 × 10−5. Therefore, the probability that Watson randomly selected RBPs and correctly predicted eight of the top ten by chance is quite low.

--> I guess random distribution was not expected anyways, but cool

In conclusion, we used IBM Watson to leverage published literature and semantic similarity to known ALS-RBPs find additional RBPs altered in ALS. This approach is a great addition to the usual candidate screening approaches, and can be used to sieve through hundreds of potential hits gen-erated from -omics based experimental approaches and make literature-based rank-ordering of targets worthy of further validation  studies.  IBM  Watson  identified  and  we  vali-dated alterations in five RBPs out of seven RBPs previously unlinked to ALS, including novel alterations of RBMS3 within cerebellar interneurons. The top-ten list included three other RBPs that were previously associated with ALS (RBM45, SC-35 and MTHFSD), while RBPs ranked near the bottom of the list failed to exhibit changes in ALS. Fur-ther studies are required to determine if RBPs ranked high by Watson contain any genetic alterations that can be linked to ALS. The continued and future use of IBM Watson and other machine learning computing tools will likely acceler-ate scientific discovery in ALS and other complex neurologi-cal disorders.

# Comments

Nice, article is CC-BY

## Tags
- 1.1.1. Literature Based Discovery, hidden knowledge and text-mining

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q47406275)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47406275)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q47406275/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q47406275&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/S00401-017-1785-8)  
