
Defining life: synthesis and conclusions.
=========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q47407732]  
  
Publication date : 17 of February, 2010  

# Highlights
The first part of the paper offers philosophical landmarks on the general issue ofdefining life. §1 defends that the recognition of“life”has always been and remainsprimarily an intuitive process, for the scientist as for the layperson. However we should notexpect, then, to be able to draw adefinitionfrom this original experience, because ourcognitive apparatus has not been primarily designed for this.

§2 is about definitions ingeneral. Two kinds of definition should be carefully distinguished: lexical definitions(based upon current uses of a word), and stipulative or legislative definitions, whichdeliberately assign a meaning to a word, for the purpose of clarifying scientific orphilosophical arguments. The present volume provides examples of these two kinds ofdefinitions. 

--> Nice! lexical x stipulative definitions: - 2. Definitions

 A first issue (§4) is whether we should define life or not, and why.Most authors are skeptical about the possibility of defining life in a strong way, although alladmit that criteria are useful in contexts such as exobiology, artificial life and the origins of life. §5 examines the possible kinds of definitions of life presented in the volume. 

  Similarly, in the 18th century, there were a lot of discussions about whether sporeswere“alive”or not: did they represent a form of“latent life”, or were they able to“resuscitate”(Tirard2003,2010)? Today, we have similar doubts if we ask: is a virus aliving being? Is an ecosystem—or even the biosphere as a whole—“alive”and (perhaps notexactly the same question) a“living being”?

  The reason for this is that for an infinity of practical situations, biological andsocial, weneedto be able to discriminate between living and non living beings.

  --> O mimetismo é bem interessante; podemos apreciar através das estratégias para parecer matéria morta algumas das distinçôes entre o vivo e o não vivo. 

  We shouldnot expect, then, to be able to draw adefinitionfrom this original experience, because ourcognitive apparatus has not been primarily designed for this. At best, psychology and thecognitive sciences could provide a list of the discriminating criteria that humans use forrecognizing life in varied situations.

  --> This is so to the point, neat neat neat

  Furthermore, as an outsider, I would like to say thathave highly appreciated the format of the papers: all seem to have adopted the implicit ruleof“making a statement”and of defending it in a restricted number of pages. This sharedattitude confers on the volume the interesting aspect of map of the relevant questions andanswers within the present state of knowledge

   I will propose a fewreflections on“defining”in science in general, and on the problem of“defining life”.

Christophe Malaterre (this volume) offers an interesting reflection on the general questionof the methods commonly used for reaching the definition of any term. This subject hasbeen extensively treated by logicians and linguists (e.g. Clark and Welsh1962; Robinson1950). First, one should distinguish between lexical definitions and stipulative definitions.

Stipulative definitions, also called“legislative”definitions”(Robinson1950), deliberately assign a meaning to a word, for thepurpose of clarifying arguments

Adopting a stipulative definition isadopting a rule:“by the wordx, we mean...”. Scientific definitions are most oftenstipulative
--> Hmm, it dependes

78 different answerswere given, that occupy 40 pages of the proceedings of the meeting (see Palyi et al.). If weDefining Life: Synthesis and Conclusions233
make use of such a document, we are discussing lexical definitions, because we are sayingthat this or that biologist, or chemist, or roboticist, in this or that precise context, has usedthe word“life”in this or that sense. But when the same André Brack adheres to theworking definition adopted in 1992 by the NASA Exobiology program (“Life is a self-sustained chemical system capable of undergoing Darwinian evolution”), he posits astipulative definition.

--> Creating a definition is science, choosing a definition is politics 

This may come as a surprise in a scientific context,but this is also a clear sign that there is no scientific consensus on the definition of life, andthat scientists feel the need of adopting a critical attitude toward this subject.

 In his reflection on essentialism, the philosopher KarlPopper has provided a powerful critical tool (Popper1945). For Popper, essentialism (aword coined by himself) is a conception of scientific knowledge that privileges questions ofthe sort“What is a certain sort of thing?”,or“What is its true nature?”. Privileging suchquestions leads to a practice based upon the idea that the essential task of science is todefine, in the sense of expressing the essence of something. Popper considers that thisattitude has been the major source of sterility in the history of science as well as inphilosophy since Antiquity

Science doesnot aim at revealing essences through definitions, but at describing and explaining thebehavior of things in given circumstances, through conjectural universal laws. This doesnot mean that definitions are unimportant. They are necessary, of course, but only from apragmatic point of view : we need definitions for the purpose of clear communication.What we need is not to tell“what something is”but“what we mean by something”

 Definitions should always be understood in a nominalist, nonessentialist, manner; they are no more than“useful abbreviations”. With an admirablepedagogical sense, Popper says that definitions“should be read, not from left to right, butfrom right to left”. By this he meant (for instance), that what counts is not“What is life?”but“What do we call life?”. What counts are the hypotheses that we make about observablephenomena; definitions should be subordinated to this primary goal of science (Popper1945, II: 1–24)

 --> Damn, I'm too Popperian

If I try to apply Popper’s recommendation, it seems that one should not try todefine“life”in a realistic way.

Bruylants, Bartik and Reisse (this volume) rightly observe that“in the majority of generaltreatises devoted to biology, the words‘life’and‘living’are never defined”


But, if we want to go further and provide a general definition of life, wemust be aware that it cannot be more than a stipulative definition, in relation with particularscientific theories. Such a definition will always be conventional, and for this reason, thewisest attitude that we may have is to accept that it is open to change, in response to newknowledge. If we do not accept this, Popper would probably go on, we must be aware thatwe enter into the realm of metaphysics.

s. Pushed to its limits, the mechanistic concept of life leads to theavoidance of the word“life”. This is exactly what happens in Descartes’work

 Of course the scientists who today want adefinitionof life want more than this; they want ascientificconcept of life

More generally, almost all authors seem to admit Bersini’s and Reisse’s(2007) assertionthat the necessity of defining life has resulted from the converging needs of three domains ofresearch that have developed spectacularly over approximately the past two or three decades:exobiology (formerly“astrobiology”), artificial life, and origins of life.

Bruylants/Bartik/Reisse go in thesame direction. They propose a scale on which“0”means that a given entity is definitelynot alive, and“1”means that we have not the slightest doubt of it being alive. For instance,all past or present bacteria and eukarya would be attributed a value of lifeness of 1 on thisscale. This version of pluralism could be labeled as“gradualism”.

--> i.e. "all instances of this class would be considered alive"

s already mentioned, a number of definitions of life have been proposed, catalogued anddiscussed in recent years. Palyi et al. (2002) have listed around forty definitions; Popa(2004) has listed and discussed ninety. Such an inflation of definitions makes me think ofthe incredible number of definitions of species that have been found in past and presentliterature. In his authoritative review, Mayden discusses eighteen different concepts of thebiological species used by biologists, all of which are considered as operational (Mayden1997).

All these definitions proceedgenus et differentia; they enunciate an essential propertythat delineates a larger class, and then one or several other properties which define life as asubclass of this larger class (on this method, see Malaterre’s interesting comments on thevarious methods of definition).

Such a method meansthat they try to identify the essence (in any sense you wish, scholastic or phenomenological)of present terrestrial life as everyone understands it today. Although I do think that thisreflection is very much in the metaphysical mood of what Popper condemned soenergetically, I must confess that it is philosophically very interesting. Such a definitionmight well be listed as a fourth (and fascinating) philosophical definition of life, beyond thethree that we have listed above. This definition looks like a mixture of the animist (orAristotelian) definition and the organizational (or Kantian) definition.




# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q47407732)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47407732)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q47407732/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q47407732&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/S11084-010-9204-3)  
