
Improving the interoperability of biomedical ontologies with compound alignments.
=================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q47566419]  
  
Publication date : 09 of January, 2018  

# Highlights

In the last decade, ontology matching systems have been evolving and are now capable of producing high-quality mappings for life sciences ontologies, usually limited to the equivalence between two ontologies. However, life sciences research is becoming increasingly transdisciplinary and integrative, fostering the need to develop matching strategies that are able to handle multiple ontologies and more complex relations between their concepts.


We have developed ontology matching algorithms that are able to find compound mappings between multiple biomedical ontologies, in the form of ternary mappings, finding for instance that “aortic valve stenosis”(HP:0001650) is equivalent to the intersection between “aortic valve”(FMA:7236) and “constricted” (PATO:0001847). 


However, when data is annotated with different ontologies, to allow data interoperability the ontologies themselves need to become interoperable. 

For instance, the class HP:0000337 labelled “broad forehead” is equivalent to an axiom obtained by relating the classes PATO:0000600 (“increased width”) and FMA:63864 (“forehead”) via an intersection. Such mappings allow a fuller semantic integration of multidimensional semantic spaces, supporting more complex data analysis and knowledge discovery tasks.

Using a source ontology and a single target ontology as input, several binary alignments were created by applying AML’s Word Matcher and String Matcher (see the “AgreementMakerLight” section). 



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q47566419)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47566419)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q47566419&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/S13326-017-0171-8)  
