
From word models to executable models of signaling networks using automated assembly.
=====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q47596954]  
  
Publication date : 24 of November, 2017  

# Highlights

We have implemented this approach in the Integrated Network and Dynamical Reasoning Assembler (INDRA), which draws on existing natural language processing systems as well as pathway information in Pathway Commons and other online resources. 

In this paper, we explore the idea that natural language can serve as a direct input for dynamical modeling. Natural language has many benefits as a means of expressing mechanistic information: In addition to being familiar, it can concisely capture experimental findings about mechanisms that are ambiguous and incomplete.     


The method and software tool described in this paper, the Integrated Network and Dynamical Reasoning Assembler (INDRA), addresses these challenges and makes it possible to construct different types of executable models directly from natural language and fragmentary information in pathway databases.

. The output of this process is represented as a logical form (LF) graph (Manshadi et al, 2008). The LF graph represents the sense of each word (e.g., “protein”) and captures the semantic roles of relevant arguments (e.g., “affected”) for each predicate (e.g., “activation”).

The architecture of INDRA consists of three layers of modules (1–3). In layer (1), interfaces collect mechanisms from natural language processing systems (e.g., TRIPS Interface) and pathway databases (e.g., Pathway Commons Interface) and Processors (e.g., TRIPS Processor, BioPAX Processor) extract INDRA Statements from their outputs. Statements, the internal representation in INDRA, constitute layer (2). In layer (3), INDRA Statements are assembled into various model formats by Assembler modules (e.g., PySB Assembler, Graph Assembler).



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q47596954)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47596954)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q47596954&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.15252/MSB.20177651)  
