
A comprehensive, cell specific microRNA catalogue of human peripheral blood.
============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q47678818]  
  
Publication date : 01 of September, 2017  

# Highlights


With this study, we provide a comprehensive reference dataset of detailed miRNA expression profiles from seven types of human peripheral blood cells (NK cells, B lymphocytes, cytotoxic T lymphocytes, T helper cells, monocytes, neutrophils and erythrocytes), serum, exosomes and whole blood.

The
study provides the most comprehensive contribution
to date towards a complete miRNA catalogue of human peripheral blood, which can be used as a reference for future studies

The dataset has been deposited in GEO and also can be explored interactively
following this link: http://134.245.63.235/ikmb-tools/
bloodmiRs.

--> Site is up, but less functional than ideal

In recent years, the long-standing theory that each
miRNA precursor (more precisely each arm of the hairpin molecule) produces one constant mature miRNA sequence, was disproved by results from high-throughput sequencing and subsequent bioinformatics analyses. It has
been shown that a single miRNA hairpin arm can give rise
to multiple distinct isoforms (isomiRs) that are now referred to as the mature miRNA transcripts and that can
differ in their length and sequence composition (10).

Moreover, due to the differential miRNA expression in different blood cell types and the uneven distribution
of cell types based on different conditions, e.g. diseases, it
is difficult to distinguish between true positive, false positive but also potential false negative signals in sRNA-Seq
datasets

--> 1.4.4. Types of knowledge about cell types : microRNA markers

Human peripheral blood cells were isolated from leukocyte
concentrates (buffy coats) of healthy donors by Ficoll density gradient centrifugation


Magnetic activated cell sorting (MACS, Miltenyi Biotec,
Bergisch-Gladbach, Germany) was used to purify CD56+
(NK cell), CD19+ (B cell), CD8+ (cytotoxic T cell), CD4+
(T helper cell), CD14+ (monocyte), CD15+ (neutrophil)
and CD235a+ (erythrocyte) cell populations, following the
manufacturer’s instructions. CD14+, CD15+, CD19+ and
CD235a+ cells were isolated by positive selection, whereas
CD4+, CD8+ and CD56+ cells were isolated by negative selection. Purity of the individual cell populations was assessed using FACS.


 Most cell populations were rather homogeneous with purity over 90%. Neutrophils, however, displayed considerable heterogeneity with a mean sorting purity of 79%

Figure 1. Simplified human hematopoietic tree of different cell compounds

--> Eerily lke the one on Wikipedia

Surprisingly, 3 trimming distributions showed clear lineage-specific patterns across the
cell types.

Figure 5. The similarity structure of human blood cell miRNA transcriptomes. MDS plot showing three clearly resolved clusters corresponding
to lymphoid cells (NK cells, B cells, T cells and Th cells), myeloid cells
(monocytes and neutrophils) and anucleate erythrocytes. 

--> Cool, looks like single-cell tsnes

Most sRNA-based biomarker studies today investigate
archetype miRNA or miRNA-arm expression in either
serum, exosomes or whole blood, while only a small number of studies focus on sub-compartments of blood, such as
the peripheral mononuclear cell fraction (PBMCs) or even single cell types.

We identified 271 known miRNA species within
RBCs. The results of a paper by Doss et al. (27) are nicely
mirrored in our RBC profiles, although we are able to expand the catalogue of highly abundant miRNAs in RBCs


All of six cell type specific miRNAs from Allantaz et al. were confirmed within our dataset (26). The
miRNA profile of monocytes and B-cells reported by Leidinger et al. were also completely verified by our findings. T
An interesting observation is that almost a half of cell
type specific isomiRs were arising from miRNA-arms which
previously, in our dataset, were not assigned as cell type specific, showing that a big proportion of molecules is diluted
when looking only at the miRNA-arm level

--> 1.4.4. Types of knowledge about cell types isomiRs (distinct isoforms (isomiRs) that are now referred to as the mature miRNA transcripts and that candiffer in their length and sequence composition))


# Comments

I wonder if there is a "miRNA marker" database.

Found: CNS microRNA profiles: a database for cell type enriched microRNA expression across the mouse central nervous system

+ Supplementary Table S4 has cell-type specific miRNAs

## Tags

1.4.4. Types of knowledge about cell types

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q47678818)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47678818)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q47678818/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'A%20comprehensive%2C%20cell%20specific%20microRNA%20catalogue%20of%20human%20peripheral%20blood.'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
