
Transcriptional Architecture of Synaptic Communication Delineates GABAergic Neuron Identity.
============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q47752725]  
  
Publication date : 20 of September, 2017  

# Highlights
Single-cell transcriptome analysis of phenotype characterized GABAergic neurons

We discovered that cardinal GABAergic neuron types are delineated by a transcriptional architecture that encodes their synaptic communication patterns. This architecture comprises 6 categories of ∼40 gene families, including cell-adhesion molecules, transmitter-modulator receptors, ion channels, signaling proteins, neuropeptides and vesicular release components, and transcription factors. 

A fundamental question is whether these variations are largely subjective to measurements and only can be managed by operational grouping, or whether multiple distinct and congruent cell features can be integrated to define discrete “cells types” that reflect biological reality and mechanisms. The problem of neuronal diversity is unlikely to be solved without solving the equal, if not more fundamental, problem of neuronal identity that is the flip side of the cell-type coin (Seung and Sümbül, 2014). However, the biological basis of neuronal identity is poorly understood and cell definition and classification schemes in the brain remain contentious (DeFelipe et al., 2013).

we designed a computational genomics strategy to screen through the ∼620 HGNC (Human Genome Nomenclature Committee) gene families for those whose differential expression reliably distinguish these subpopulations.

Accumulated anatomical, physiological, and molecular evidence indicate that these are non-overlapping subpopulations, and CHCs, LPCs, and PVBCs are considered cardinal types (He et al., 2016). We define these 6 populations as phenotype characterized populations, or PCPs.

For example, UNC5 members and their ligand netrin1 are differentially expressed; UNC5b is highly specific to CHCs (Figures S2B and S3C); these receptor-ligand pairs might mediate cell-cell recognition (Figure S3A).

In particular, the metabotropic zinc (Zn2+) sensor GPR39/mZnR is specifically expressed in VIP/CCK and to a less extent SST/NOS1 cells. Upon zinc binding, GPR39 promotes KCC2 membrane trafficking, thereby enhancing GABAAR mediated hyperpolarization (Chorin et al., 2011). Thus GPR39 in VIP/CCKCs might mediate activity-dependent modulation of their excitability


   
# Comments
## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q47752725)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47752725)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q47752725&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2017.08.032)  
