
Funding knowledgebases: Towards a sustainable funding model for the UniProt use case.
=====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q47732789]  
  
Publication date : 27 of November, 2017  

# Highlights

In this work, twelve funding models for data resources are described and
applied on the case study of the Universal Protein Resource (UniProt), a
key resource for protein sequences and functional information knowledge.
We show that most of the models present inconsistencies with open access
or equity policies, and that while some models do not allow to cover the
total costs, they could potentially be used as a complementary income
source.
We propose the Infrastructure Model as a sustainable and equitable model
for all core data resources in the life sciences. 

Here, we
have estimated that less than 1% of the total amount dedicated to research
grants in the life sciences would be sufficient to cover the costs of the core
data resources worldwide, including both knowledgebases and deposition
databases

--> Damn we should invest much more in 1.3.2. Biological knowledgebases

repositories rely partially or completely on data deposition by
the users, while in knowledgebases, the information in general requires to be carefully selected and processed by experts.

• promote the re-use of the data, with new analysis/methodologies and comparisons,
 • reduce the need to recreate or regenerate duplicate data,
 • speed up research through easy access to integrated data,
leading to considerable time and efficiency gains for
researchers,
 • make data available for teaching

 manual curation
cannot be fully replaced by the existing Artificial Intelligence
(AI) technology. Text-mining is, however, often used as a
first-line method for data extraction and identification of relevant
literature
--> 3.1. Cell-type markers in Wikidata

So, dedicated funding is necessary to curate and structure the data so that they can be accessible and usable by the scientific community. 

1. National funding: governmental agencies fund the infrastructure directly, through non-cyclical funding programmes
2. Infrastructure model: funding agencies pay directly for
data resources as a necessary part of the research infrastructure, through a percentage of the research funding that is
specifically set aside

This model is not implemented yet as a funding model for
life sciences knowledgebases.

3. Institutional support: universities or institutions have their own
repository/data bank that is maintained through the “internal”
institutional funds. 

4. Research project grants: competitive cyclic research or dedicated resource grants from national funding agencies

5. Content licensing/industrial support model10: requires commercial users to pay a fee

6. User subscription fees: users are charged on a time base (e.g.
every month or year) or on download sizes

7. Value-added/asymmetrical pricing model (freemium
service)8
: a basic data set within the database is freely available
to anyone. Individual scientists or companies that are willing
and able to pay a higher fee can buy additional levels of service,
better data access or additional tools and resources

8. Infrastructural razor & blades14: an attractive, inexpensive
or free initial offer (“razor”) encourages continuing future purchases of follow-up items or services (“blades”

9. Public-private consortium7: is a mixture of funding from government bodies and industries

10. Online advertising and corporate sponsorship: corporate sponsorship is part advertising and part dealmaking

11. Open source volunteering (or wiki approach)
15: replacing part of data curation by community participation can be
attractive as it has a low cost. It depends, however, on drawing
contributions from busy users. In addition, contributions tend
to be sporadic, leaving many gaps. Hence it can only replace
(a small) part of curation and therefore still requires funding
for curation, software engineers, storage space, and operating
costs.
• GeneWiki (en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Gene_Wiki)
—informal collection of pages on human genes and
proteins;
• WikiProteins —web-based, interactive and semantically supported workspace based on Wiki pages of
biomedical concepts16;
• TOPSAN (proteins.burnham.org) —a collaborative
annotation environment for structural genomics17.

--> 3.2. Community annotation of texts via Wikidata

12. Donations: philanthropic funding such as grants and donations can generate income
• Human Cell Atlas (www.humancellatlas.org) —funded by
the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative;
• Wikipedia (www.wikipedia.org) —funded by small
voluntary donations from thousands of users.

13. Mixed models: as mentioned, most of the knowledgebases
rely on diversified multiple funding streams

Table 1. Comparison of the 12 models in function of open access, equity, stability and key dependency. The
aspects that favour open access, equity of users and stability over time are highlighted in bold.

--> Cool table


UniProt annual effective costs, rounded up to €20 million, are
analysed.

a theoretical global cost of the ensemble of
the bioinformatics major core data resources for life science
research (i.e. repositories and knowledgebases), estimated to
about €190 million

11. Wiki approach. The model does not generate a revenue, but describes a way how data could be annotated, i.e.
through voluntary participation of the community


 In general, the more complex a database is,
the more likely professional curation is to be favoured over
crowd-sourced curation22,26. Therefore, this approach is definitely not applicable to the case of UniProt: high quality
data thanks to professional expert curation are at the heart of
this resource, and quality could not be guaranteed through a
crowd-sourced curation.

12. Donations. Many online databases and journals rely on
donations from people around the world. The most famous is
Wikipedia, the free collaborative collection of knowledge. Even
though Wikipedia’s content comes from active users on a voluntary base (i.e. at cost zero), the site has running costs that
are covered primarily by individual donations, in addition to
other funding sources that allow to sustain specific projects.
In 2016, the Wikimedia Foundation received $ 77.2 million
(€72.5 million) from 5.4 million users 

The model presented in this work is in line with these considerations: its approach encourages equity, internationality and
economic dependability, but it necessitates major changes to the way funds are distributed. It thus requires negotiating with
the funding agencies at an international level, with probably
less effort than with all the user country governments, and the
introduction of a suitable structure to support this model in
the life science community.
# Comments
1.3.2. Biological knowledgebases


## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q47732789)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q47732789)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q47732789/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q47732789&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q47732789/P921%3BP4510)  
