
Automated cell-type classification in intact tissues by single-cell molecular profiling.
========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q48262342]  
  
Publication date : 10 of January, 2018  

# Highlights

. We apply PLISH to expression profile~2900 cells in intact mouse lung, which identifies andlocalizes known cell types, including rare ones. Unsupervised classification of the cells indicatesdifferential expression of ‘housekeeping’ genes between cell types, and re-mapping of two sub-classes of Club cells highlights their segregated spatial domains in terminal airways


the human body contains several hundred types of specialized cells that havedifferent roles
--> "hundreds of cell types"


Here, we report an in situ hybridization technique with performance characteristics that enablerapid and scalable single-cell expression profiling in tissue.

An unexpected discovery from this experiment is that murine Club cells separate into two populations that differ molecu-larly and segregate anatomically

--> Nice!! specification of "murine"!

PLISH constitutes a novel, single cell spatial-profiling technologythat combines high performance, versatility and low cost. Because of its technical simplicity, it will beaccessible to a broad scientific community

. A pool often H probesets exhibited much higher RNA detection efficiency than a single H probeset, asexpected (Figure 1D). However, when the RNA-recognition sequence of either the left or right Hprobe in each set was scrambled, there were no detectable puncta. Thus, both H probes had to becorrectly targeted to generate a signal

--> Robust, cool.

For these experiments, we stained mouse lungsections for secretoglobin 1a1 (Scgb1a1), a marker of airway Club cells

Third, we analyzed murine lung sections for RNA expression of three genes: the AT2 cell markerSftpc, the macrophage-enriched marker Lysozyme 2 (Lyz2), and Scgb1a1.

We further observed a striking spatial segregation of the two Club cell classes.ActbHiClub cells clustered together at the bronchial terminus, while ActbLoClub cells populatedmore proximal domains.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q48262342)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q48262342)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q48262342/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q48262342&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q48262342/P921%3BP4510)  
