
The Human Cell Atlas: Technical approaches and challenges.
==========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q48563763]  
  
Publication date : 28 of October, 2017  

# Highlights

The Human Cell Atlas (HCA) is a large, international consortium
that aims to identify and describe every cell type in the human
body [1]

The HCA is likely to ultimately
measure many different aspects of the cells that it studies, but we
feel that two foundational approaches will be (1) single-cell RNA
sequencing (scRNAseq) and (2) understanding the physical arrangement of cells within organs and tissues through the analysis
of spatially resolved gene expression at single-cell resolution.

--> 1.4.5 and 1.4.2


Current standard
scRNAseq protocols typically require the use of freshly isolated
cells, and, moreover, it is imperative that the transcriptomes of
the cells are not allowed to decay between acquisition and processing. This will ensure that the observed cell-type-specific
transcriptional identities are biologically relevant.

--> 1.4.2.1

Two additional points are absolutely critical no matter what
methods are used to acquire and process the tissue samples.
First, the collection of detailed, extensive and accurate metadata
will be essential to ensure that each experiment can be analysed
and interpreted correctly. These metadata must include details
about the donor’s medical status, the procedures and methods
used to collect the samples and any relevant time intervals (such
as that between cessation of ventilation and sample collection).
In addition, detailed information must be recorded about the
protocols used for all sample preservation and processing.
Secondly, it would be unthinkable to collect samples for the HCA
without adhering to the necessary legal and ethical requirements
that control work with human tissues

Gene expression is not the only way to define cell states and
so single-cell measurements at the genomic and epigenomic
levels will be useful in the HCA. Existing methods can profile
DNA sequence [37], chromatin accessibility [38], chromatin state
[39], three-dimensional (3D) architecture [40, 41] and methylation status [42]. 

‘Multi-omics’ approaches combine one of these
methods with scRNAseq to provide even deeper information
about cell state by simultaneously assessing, for example genome sequence and RNA expression (G&T-seq; [43]), DNA methylation and RNA expression (scMT-seq; [44]) or cell surface
proteins and RNA expression (CITE-seq; [45]).


The HCA will not only generate a catalogue of cell types using
scRNAseq but will also create a true atlas by elucidating the spatial
relationships between cells in the context of tissues. This will require methods that quantify the expression of genes or proteins in
a spatially resolved way. One such method is single-molecule RNA
fluorescent in situ hybridization (smFISH) [46, 47]

--> 1.4.2 and 1.4.5

We do not believe that any single method that will be suitable for the entirety of the HCA. 

The computational challenges can be split into four broad areas:
(1) estimation of expression levels, (2) definition of cell identity,
(3) identification of gene signatures and (4) analysis of spatially
resolved data. Finally, in the context of the HCA, large data sets
could be unified and integrated into ensemble analyses.
--> 1.4.2.1


To describe and define every cell type in the human body, one
must first address the meaning of ‘cell type’. It will not be trivial
to arrive at such a definition that is generally applicable to the
data sets generated for the HCA. One working conceptual
framework is that a cell’s identity at a given moment is defined
by the unique combination of all the factors that influence it
[92]. In this framework, a cell type (e.g. hepatocyte) can be considered as the stable and permanent features of its identity,
whilst a cell state can be considered as the transient aspects of
its status (e.g. an immune cell response to cytokines). 

We expect that an important use of the large HCA data set is likely to be in developing these concepts through the construction of datadriven and generalizable mathematical definitions of cell type and state.

Importantly, multiple definitions do not have to be mutually exclusive and could all provide utility in addressing different biological questions.
--> Core for 2.4!

Assigning cells to discrete clusters is not appropriate when describing cell
populations with continuous phenotypes (i.e. cell states), e.g. stem
cells during differentiation and immune cells during activation
[113]



Defining the gene signatures specific to particular cell types or
states allows us to build classifiers for cell identity prediction
and to draw conclusions about the differentiation mechanisms
and functions of the cells of interest. I

--> 1.4.4
# Comments

## Tags
1.4.1
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q48563763)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q48563763)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q48563763/P921%3BP4510)  
