
Cells in experimental life sciences - challenges and solution to the rapid evolution of knowledge.
==================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q48519854]  

# Highlights

We have compiled a series of the challenges and the proposals of solutions discussed in the First International Workshop on CELLS at the the International Conference on Biomedical Ontology (ICBO).

After the discussion, we came to an agreement that both experimental and computational scientists in this domain would benefit from a shared consensus cell metadata model which can only be derived by community participation, discussion, and collaboration wherever possible. 

The workshop covered two main areas: 
(i) the extension of CL and CLO for new technologies and experiments,
(ii) real-world use cases and adaptations beyond CL and CLO. 

Examples of biomedical subject matters in the scope of this workshop were: 
(i) the relationship of cell components to cell types and other biomedical entities and how that may impact health and disease biology 
(ii) in vitro - in vivo relationships between primary samples and immortal lines
(iii) modeling of cell responses and fast-growing cell-related data generated by new technologies (e.g. novel cell types identified via interpretation of CyTOF and single cell RNA-Seq data)

New knowledge requires new vocabularies, but when do we stop? Or where do we begin? When should new knowledge be qualified for a new term?

When a cell can cleanly be classified with logical axioms such as those shown in the retinal bipolar cells by Osumi-Sutherland et al. (BMC Bioinformatics, this issue), there may exist another case where it may not be as straightforward to do so as shown by Bakken et al. in their attempt to perform high-content classification of brain cells (BMC Bioinformatics, this issue).

Neither the biologist community nor biomedical ontologist community alone can overcome this issue.

Bringing the bench researchers who are experts in laboratory experiments to the first ICBO- CELLS workshop has exposed them to the ontology development and considerations, and at the same time, the ontologists have gained insight to the hands-on activities at the bench

When investigating how to best represent the cell modeling with ontologies, two main solutions were proposed. Should we take the Rector normalization approach [5] in building design patterns for the classification of new cell types with granular details of cell attributes such as those exemplified in bipolar neuronal cells (Osumi-Sutherland, this issue)? Or should we extend the ontology by directly asserting the new classes with axiom declarations to supplement the details of the new class attributes when examining cells with detailed surface marker proteins? (Bekken et al., this issue).


As shown in the few scenarios here, it is clear without a doubt that experimental cell standardized nomenclature is a very important driving mechanism to move high-content single-cell research forward.

Probabilities cannot be asserted directly into the ontology, but rather using other modeling techniques such as nanopublications [8] or OBAN [9] to avoid logical errors when reasoning with the ontology.


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q48519854)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q48519854)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q48519854/P921%3BP4510)  
