
Retinal ganglion cells: properties, types, genera, pathways and trans-species comparisons.
==========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q48839876]  

# Highlights

This article attempts to develop an empirical foundation for the notion of ‘cell type’, and to use this notion to clarify the issues involved in the classification, path? ways, and trans-species comparisons of retinal ganglion cells.


Unlike discovery, which has the nature of an event, demonstration has the nature of a process. A claim that a certain cell grouping constitutes a type may be initially tentative and weak, but may gain in strength with further investigation. The process of demonstration may go on for some time, and many investigators may contribute to it.

The claim for a new type may rest initially on little more than the implied assertion that if the reader were to study comparable data for a comparable period of time then they too would agree that a certain cell group constitutes a distinguishable type.

the literature contains more numerous examples of cell group? ings no longer accepted, and this fact, if nothing else, justifies a certain degree of initial skepticism regarding such claims.
--> I would really like to see some examples.

The issues in the empirical demonstration of cell types, as well as other cell groupings, prove to be involved, and the aim of this paper is to present them in a clear and coherent way.

In the first section, we attempt to develop the notion of a ‘natural cell type’; such types have an objective reality in that they originate in the species that is studied rath? er than in the mind of the investigator.

--> This is a _very_ strong philosophical position. Sounds aristotelian essensialistic.

In the second section, we discuss the issues that arise when one attempts to classi? fy cell types; that is to collect these types into various groupings. We again impose the constraint that such groupings be en? tirely empirical. A method is developed, based upon what we term ‘Whewell affini? ties’, for empirically testing whether cer? tain groupings are ‘natural


Cajal clearly recognized that there were distinct ‘types’ of ganglion cells in the retina, although he did not discuss this notion explicitly, and in some detailed descriptions it is not clear whether he had in mind different types, or variations of form within a given type.

A ‘natural type’ is one presumed to exist in nature, which has a reality independent of its investigation. Natural types are, therefore, discovered and demonstrated rather than defined.

--> ! My theory of technotypes is quite orthogonal to natural types (if that even exists).

when we need to make assertions about cells belonging to cluster F we will refer to these as 'type F’ cells. When we need to draw distinctions between the den? dritic diameters of different ‘type F’ cells, we use the term ‘variation’

increasing the dimensionality of the param? etric space can reveal clustering that would not be evident when fewer parame? ters were simultaneously considered.


When we assert that a certain cell belongs to a certain ‘cell type’ we mean noth? ing more than that the cell parameters map to a certain cluster region in paramet? ric space. There are no additional or impli? cit attributes attached to the notion o f‘cell type’ as used here. It is not necessary to come up with a perceived ‘functional role’ or other ‘meaning’ for these cells in order to justify the recognition of the type, since the notion of type is defined operationally entirely in terms of the cluster.

The absence of additional attributes from the development of the notion of ‘cell type’ is deliberate and necessary if the
notion of cell type is to have an empirical foundation.

--> Nice paragraph! Super relevant for current scRNA-seq discussions.

Inconsequential Parameters
Not all parameters are useful for typing ganglion cells. Some, like the initial direc? tion with which the axon leaves the soma, appear to be totally inconsequential for this purpose. Figure 5 shows

However, not all of these parameters are necessary to identify a given ganglion cell as being a member of a specific ganglion-cell type. Thus within the set of parameters that fully character? izes the known differences between the ganglion-cell types, there may exist a var? iety of smaller subsets, each containing sufficient information to identify a given cell as belonging to a specific cluster, and thus to a specific ganglion-cell type.

--> This has an implicit ontological structure of subclasses! We might discuss what is more effective, sure, but we have to consider the option.


A related issue concerns the inclusion of unrelated categorical parameters. An example is the sex of the animal. Note that excluding this parameter from the typing of ganglion cells does not ignore the pos? sibility that a certain ganglion-cell type might occur only in males or only in fe? males. Likewise, the categorical parameter involving the eye from which the ganglion cell came (left or right), is more related to the bilateral symmetry of the animal than to any particular feature of the visual system, and may be ignored.


In the next section we develop the notion that the ‘Whewell affinities’ between ‘on-center X’ cells and ‘off-center X’ cells
allow them to be combined into a group, which we term the ‘X genus’. X cells are often referred to as a ‘type’ consisting of two ‘sub-types’. Whether this group is best termed a ‘genus’ or a ‘type’ is a terminological issue, which we outline following the discussion of the ‘X’ group.


At the level of the empirical distinctions between groups of cells, the inclusion of the ipsilateral/contralateral parameter is both natural and reasonable. However, a terminological problem arises, in that the inclusion of this parameter significantly extends the notion of the term ‘type’. Per? haps an additional term that refers only to cells whose parameters map to cluster re? gions could be devised, and the term ‘type’ used to mean whatever we like. This is a terminological issue, which we will not at? tempt to resolve.

Occasionally the possession of a property is sufficent to identify a cell. For ex? ample, Mariani[ 1982] recently described a new type of primate ganglion cell that contacts photoreceptors. Since no other ganglion cells are known to have this pro? perty, any ganglion cell showing it can be identified as belonging to this type.

ll properties. To do otherwise would be to argue without a serious question at
hand. But the notions of ‘properties' and ‘types’ are distinct, and this needs to be reflected in the terminology. Confusion is removed if the set of names for types does not overlap the set of names for properties.


The notion that a given cell type is indivisible retains the character of a hypothesis.

--> Which is never true for pragmatic concepts, as you can always combine with other conditions.

Natural types are there to be discovered and demonstrated; they cannot be locked up by means of a definition.

--> _So_ strong! Hard to prove, though. 

Whether the notion of ‘natural types’
has a broader significance than in the con? text used here is open to question, but the following extensions may prove to be rele? vant. First, no assumption has thus far been made as to the origin of the observed co- variance. Its ultimate expression is presum? ably genetic, each cell type reflecting the expression of a certain set of genes.

This idea may be formalized in the following way: we ignore genes common to all cells, all neurons and all ganglion cells.
The remaining gene set, which we term the ‘ganglion-cell typing set’, or more simply the ‘typing set’, will have the following properties: (a) by definition, no gene in this set is expressed by all ganglion cells; (b) by definition, every gene in this set is expressed by the ganglion cells of at least one type.

--> This is a full plate for scRNA-seq people.

It is important to recognize that the names of cell types are nothing more than identifiers of clusters. The numbers at the left of each row could serve equally well. The term is an identifier, not a definition.

We have included as another synonym
'inner beta cell’, to emphasize that there are not both morphological and function? al types of ganglion cells in the retina. Since the correspondence between electro- physiological and morphological findings is a hypothesis, currently acquiring confir? mation, we are not suggesting that these terms be used interchangeably at present. But just as ‘spinal motoneuron’ has be? come the common term used both physio? logically and anatomically, so too should the different types of ganglion cells acquire common names, irrespective of the method of investigation.


--> I totally agree with the first half. The second part, not so much, de degree of ontological commitment is too high. 

The next question is whether there exist between types a 'natural affinity’ that is in some way unique, so that a grouping of these types would constitute a biological fact ra? ther than a convention. Any grouping of ganglion-cell types is, in effect, a classifi? cation scheme for the set of types.

The adoption of a constraint, ‘artificial’ or ‘natural’, allows one to state that a certain grouping is false, in that it is inconsistent with the imposed constraint.

among living cats, splitters have estab? lished as many as 28 distinct genera, while lumpers make do with only one [Simpson, 1961]. It is not that these systematists necessarily differ on factual matters, and may all agree as to the form of the phylo? genetic tree; rather they differ on issues such as the point at which twigs become branches on this tree

ll classification systems of species contain both a ‘natural’ (taxonomic) component in their reflection of genealogy, and an ‘artificial’ (categori? cal) component in the particular addition? al criteria that are chosen to determine how species are to be grouped into a hier? archically organized arrangement of tax? ons.


If the differentiation of ganglion cells occurs by a series of steps that successively narrows the range of types to which the ganglion cell can become a member, then the tree? like structure of these sequential steps could provide a useful empirical con? straint on the classification of ganglion cells. But this possibility has only theoreti? cal interest at present, since we know no? thing of the genetic expression of type.

The strong covariance of properties observed be? tween certain pairs or small groups of ganglion types, relative to other possible groupings, is very much greater than has been observed in the systematics of spe? cies. We term these relations ‘Whewell af? finities’ and develop the argument below that they form an objective basis for grouping ganglion-cell types, at least to a limited degree.

the known number of ganglion-cell types in any retina is probably not much greater than 20, so that we are not faced with the necessity of developing an all-in? clusive classification scheme.

--> If we take all proposed classification schemes, I bet the number is far far greater than 20, even for a single species.

The close relation between the process
of classification and human psychology was recognized and described by William WliewelP [1847], He noted that we could hardly think without categorizing and classifying the rich variety of phenomena we experience, and we do so incessantly. Yet, this very process acts upon our per? ception of these phenomena, by focusing attention on those features that form the basis for the classification

When considering how cell types might be classified, it might seem natural to attempt to draw analogies - for example equating ‘ganglion-cell type’ with ‘animal species’. But the notion of ‘species’, as it has devel? oped in systematic zoology [e.g. Mayr, 1982], is very different from the notion of
‘(ganglion) cell type’ as developed here. Although both animal species and ganglion-cell types have been shaped by evolu? tion, the forces that have shaped them are qualitatively distinct from one another.

All classification schemes are based upon a fundamental taxonomic unit, which in our case is a ganglion-cell type within a given animal species. 

--> For me, it is the technotype!

We do not mean to suggest the old and outdated notion that a ‘genus’ somehow contains the ‘essence’ of the form, or in some way expresses the ‘general form’ (i.e. as in the ‘generic/specific’ distinction).

--> Explicit conflict with the genus-differentia scheme that bases much of today's ontologies. 

Ganglion-Cell Genera
As far as we know, everyone who has recorded from them agrees that certain ganglion-cell types should be grouped together.

One can form other groupings that fail to satis? fy this maxim, but they are not unique, and are useful only insofar as they satisfy particular needs to make assertions about particular groups of ganglion cells. Exam? ples are ‘cholinergic ganglion cells’, ‘on- center ganglion cells’ and ‘direction-selec? tive ganglion cells’. Such terms should be reserved for expressing common ‘proper? ties’ of certain ganglion-cell types, and may be viewed as arbitrary slices through the cell-parametric space.

Trans-Species Comparisons 
Terminology readily extends across species - we speak of the wings of birds, bats and flies, the eyes of cockroaches and crocodiles, and the ganglion cells of frogs and men.

When we speak of ‘spinal motoneurons’ in frog or man we have in mind two cell groups that not only satisfy a definition (spinal neuron having an axon pass? ing via the ventral roots to innervate mus? cle fibers), but two groups that are also ap? parently homologous among vertebrates

The question at issue here is not whether ganglion cells in general are homolo? gous, both within and across vertebrate species, but whether homologues can be found across species between specific ganglion-cell types or genera.

The closer two species are in their genealogy, the more likely it is for neural homologues to be present.

--> Inductional reasoning, but solid. We cannot say for certain, but we can bet higher.


Homoplastic Comparisons 

Just as there are performance features of flight that impose constraints on the form of wings, so too are there perform? ance features of vision that impose con? straints upon the set of ganglion cells found in the retina.

Walls [1942; pp. 163-168] has argued that, while rods and cones are homologous as a group, and that one of these forms preceded the other in evolution, modern rods are not homol? ogous among themselves, having been transmuted from cones at independent phylogenetic points.

--> This is gold. It is a clear limitation of seeing cell types _just_ as evolutionary, and ostracizing classification based on other features. 

We will argue that, whereas ‘common properties’ can arise from either homology or homoplasy, the
only reasonable extension of the notion of ‘common type’ to other species is one re? stricted to affinities resulting from homology. 

--> Wow, I did not expect that. Very essentialistic. 

The assertion that both diurnal birds
and primates have ‘color-coding’ ganglion cells is an assertion that both taxa have
ganglion cells that exhibit the property ‘color-coding’. A group of cell types in some bird is being compared with a group of cell types in some primate, both groups being related by a common property. One or more of the ‘color-coding’ cell types in the bird could likewise be compared with one or more of the cell types in the primate on the basis of some other common prop? erty, such as somal size, central projec? tion, or spatial density across the retina. In general, the affinities between cell types based upon their properties will be multi? variate, so that no unique one-to-one correspondence can be drawn between the cell types in one species, and those in an? other.

--> Of course you _can_, they will just be _artificial_. But artificial classifications are extremely valuable, and can be made much more precisely than _exclusively_ natural classifications. If mathematics had stopped at natural numbers, you would not be reading this. 

The criteria for establishing homologies are simi? lar to those employed to establish phylogeny, and both remain difficult and unresolved problems in bi? ology. The issue here is whether there exists, even in principle, a method able to demonstrate homologies. As noted above, there appears to be a close relation between the phylogenetic criteria and Whewell’s maxim, and this appears to extend to homologic criteria as well.

--> Seems like a question that is still open.

If one allows an extension of nomenclature for ‘cell type’ based upon similar properties, then, since there is no unique way of doing so, the commonality of the nomenclature across species will depend upon the com? mon property or set of properties chosen, and thus reflect nothing more than the oc? currence of shared properties.

--> Exactly, and such an organized system would be immensely valuable.


Carnivores and lagomorphs diverged at the lime of the origin of mammals, so that if this terminology reflects a homology, then it goes back a long way. But a similar? ity based upon analogous development is also possible, and it is not yet possible to determine with any assurance the underly? ing basis of the observed similarities

The covariance of properties observed between cells provides the empirical basis for the notion of ganglion-cell types

A clear and unambiguous ex? tension of the terminology of ganglion-cell types oc? curs when these terms are restricted to identify those central neurons that receive their excitatory input en? tirely from signals derived from the corresponding ganglion-cell

# Comments
