
Genomic and molecular control of cell type and cell type conversions.
=====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q49436822]  
  
Publication date : 22 of November, 2017  

# Highlights

Cell types have traditionally been defined by their morphologies or biological activity, yet the
underlying molecular controls of cell type remain unclear. The onset of single cell technologies, and more
recently genomics (particularly single cell genomics), has substantially increased the understanding of
the concept of cell type, but has also increased the complexity of this understanding

In this review, we will discuss the molecular definitions of cell types and cell type control, and particularly how endogenous and exogenous transcription factors can control cell types and cell type conversions.

The cells of an organism are made up of a limited number of ‘cell
types’ that are reused in different tissues and combine to form
organs and systems.

--> That is a very strong conception of cell type! Tag 2.4

There have been several estimates for the
total number of cell types in an organism, with numbers ranging
from between hundreds to thousands of distinct human cell or subcell types. Classical taxonomic approaches estimated the number of
cell types in a selection of chordata as between 99 and 122,4 and
around 200 cell types in humans.5 

publications, it suggests 2260 taxonomic categories for cell types.6
CELLPEDIA also uses tissue location to define cell type, which may
inflate the total. However, the same ‘cell types’, isolated from
different tissue locations, can show radically different gene
expression patterns


Fig. 1. Gradual refinement of the definition of CD4þ T helper cell types. Schematic of
the refinement of the CD4þ T helper cells, from the original cell type ‘leukocyte’,
through to a plethora of distinct Th (T helper) cell types. The technology/technique
used to separate the cell types is indicated in grey at the branch point.

--> Interesting figure

Ultimately, the relationship between all of these heterogeneous cell types or sub-cell types within mESC cultures

It is challenging to define at what point two cell types are
distinct, and where two cells are simply at one end of a continuum.
Single cell data suggests that cells can transit through stages where
the cell type-signatures of both origin and destination cells are
simultaneously present. For example, in developing lung, some
cells express markers for both alveolar type 1 and 2 cells simultaneously,52 and early in the embryo some cells simultaneously express genes for the primitive endoderm and epiblast.53
Consequently, identifying cell types in developmental processes is
challenging. Potentially there is a continuum of expression as cells
pass through developmental stages, and at any one point along that
process the cell is not stable and may collapse into a more stable
and distinct cell type (Fig. 2).

A major candidate for the control of cell type is transcriptional
control, which may act to lock cells into a cell type.

1 Cell type-specific TFs can function as ‘master regulators’, a
class of TF that can specify cell type in the absence of any other
activity. The prototypical example is MyoD (Myod1), which when
overexpressed converts fibroblasts to myoblasts,62 activating an
entire gene expression program in the absence of specific external
cues (Fig. 3A).
However, a single master regulator for each cell type seems to be
a relatively rare phenomenon,

--> 1.4.4. Types of knowledge about cell types

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q49436822)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q49436822)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q49436822/P921%3BP4510)  
