
Systematic Analysis of Primary Sequence Domain Segments for the Discrimination Between Class C GPCR Subtypes.
=============================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q49826285]  
  
Publication date : 19 of February, 2018  

# Highlights

In  this  paper,  we  describe  the  use  of  Support  VectorMachine-based  classification  models  to  evaluate  the  subtype  discriminatingcapacity of the specific topological sequence segments


2C. K ̈onig, R. Alqu ́ezar, A. Vellido and Jes ́us GiraldoKeywordsG-Protein  coupled  receptors·biocuration·pharmaco-proteomics·machine learning·Support Vector Machines1 IntroductionResearch in biology and in the omics sciences in particular is quickly evolv-ing towards increasingly data-driven models [1], in such a way that the cre-ation, management and maintenance of publicly-available databases becomesparamount. Such databases are usually curated by specialized scientists thatcarry  out  some  of  these  tasks  in  a  process  that  has  come  to  be  known  asbiocuration[2, 3].

he unambiguous identification and characterization of biological entities isan important challenge for biocurators. Addressing this challenge, the GPCRsanalyzed in this paper are characterized according to subtype labels at differ-ent levels of organization. In previous research, we investigated the feasibilityof  discrimination  between  the  seven  defined  class  C  GPCR  subtypes  usingsupervised  machine  learning  classification  approaches.  T

As  a  whole,  these  results  provide  a  complete  and  detailed  landscape  ofthe relative capabilities of different sequence segments (from different GPCRdomains and in different combinations) in the task of discriminating betweenthe  seven  subtypes  of  class  C  GPCRs.  This  detailed  landscape  should  helpdatabase biocurators in their tasks.

The research reported in this paper is based on the web-accessible and pub-lic  protein  databases  of  the  GPCRdb  consortium.  Biocurators  of  this  typeof databases face the non-trivial challenge of unambiguously identifying andcharacterizing GPCRs. In this database, receptors are characterized accordingto subtype labels at different levels of organization. In previous research, theanalysis of the N-terminus of the extracellular domain provided some prelim-inary evidence of the potential use of individual domains of complete class CGPCR sequences as the foundation for subtype classification.We have performed a systematic analysis of the classification performanceof  each  of  the  individual  sequence  segments  in  which  the  sequence  can  bedivided in each of its structural domains, as well as the performance of sev-eral  of  their  combinations. 


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q49826285)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q49826285)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q49826285/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q49826285&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/S12539-018-0286-3)  
