
High-Dimensional Single-Cell Mapping of Central Nervous System Immune Cells Reveals Distinct Myeloid Subsets in Health, Aging, and Disease.
===========================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q50092192]  
  
Publication date : 06 of February, 2018  

# Highlights

It has been challenging to map leukocytes
in the brain, particularly during pathology.
Mrdjen et al. combine high-dimensional
single-cell cytometry with fate mapping
to capture the immune landscape of the
brain. They identify different subsets of
myeloid cells and the phenotypic
changes in CNS immune cells during
aging and in models of Alzheimer’s
disease and multiple sclerosis

d High-dimensional cytometry reveals diverse immune cells in
the steady-state CNS
d CD38 and MHCII distinguish CNS border-associated
macrophage (BAM) subsets
d A subset of microglia responds to aging and
neurodegeneration
d All microglia are homogenously affected in
neuroinflammatory disease

sing this approach,
we revealed that microglia, several subsets of
border-associated macrophages and dendritic
cells coexist in the CNS at steady state and
exhibit disease-specific transformations in the immune microenvironment during aging and in models
of Alzheimer’s disease and multiple sclerosis.

We first interrogated the steady-state CNS in 8-week-old
C57BL/6 mice. To give an overview of all immune populations
present, mass cytometry data was visualized in a t-SNE map
and cells categorized by FlowSOM-guided clustering (Figures
1B, 1C, and S1A; Hartmann et al., 2016). This approach revealed
a substantial amount of complexity of leukocytes within the
normal CNS: microglia and other macrophage-like cells, several
types of monocytes (Ly6Chi and Ly6Clo monocytes and monocyte-derived cells [MdCs]), as well as classical DCs (cDCs),
plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs), B cells (CD24+ and CD24, see
Figure S1A), T cells, natural killer (NK) cells, NKT cells,
innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), eosinophils, and mast cells. Traditional manual gating of the mass cytometry data confirmed the
identity of these cell populations (Figure S1B). Microglia
(CD45loCD11bloF4/80+
CD64+
MeTK+
Cx3CR1hiSiglec-H+
CD88lo)
were the most abundant immune cells in the steady-state CNS
(Figure 1D). We were also able to identify a separate population
of cells with a closely related surface protein expression pattern
(CD45lo/+CD11bloF4/80hiCD64hiMeTK+
Cx3CR1+
CD88hi); however, these cells lacked typical microglial Siglec-H expression
and instead expressed CD206 and CD38 (Figures 1C and S1A).


--> Very nice: We have the strain and and the age and the explicit criteria. We do not have the biological sex, though..


Microglia and the majority of BAMs are long lived (Goldmann
et al., 2016) while DCs are bone-marrow derived and short lived
(Merad and Manz, 2009)

--> 1.4.4. Types of knowledge about cell types

urther, we
identified four BAM subsets based on differential expression of
CD38, MHCII, and CCR2: subset 1 (CD38+
MHCIICCR2), subset 2 (CD38+
MHCII+
CCR2), subset 3 (CD38MHCII+
CCR2),
and subset 4 (CD38MHCII+
CCR2+
) (Figures 3B and 3C). T

By histology, we identified three
BAM subsets in these regions using differential Lyve1 and MHCII
expression (Figure S4C). The initial CyTOF-identified subsets 3
and 4 are merged here.

Of note, Lyve1+
MHCII+ (subset 2) BAMs
were enriched in the pia mater and perivascular space, whereas
the dura mater harbored relatively more single-positive MHCII+
BAMs (subsets 3 and 4) and few Lyve1+
MHCII+BAMs (Figure 3H).
# Comments
Paper _screams_ Wikidata integration.

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q50092192)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q50092192)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q50092192/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q50092192&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q50092192/P921%3BP4510)  
