
Cell-type-resolved alternative splicing patterns in mouse liver.
================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q50084595]  
  
Publication date : 08 of January, 2018  

# Highlights

Alternative splicing (AS) is an important post-transcriptional regulatory mechanism to generate
transcription diversity

About 46.2% of multi-exon genes undergo AS
from the four cell types of mouse liver: : hepatocyte, liver sinusoidal endothelial cell, Kupffer cell
and hepatic stellate cell, which regulates cell-specific functions and maintains cell characteristics. We also present a cell-type-specific splicing factors network in these four cell types of
mouse liver, allowing data mining and generating knowledge to elucidate the roles of splicing
factors

--> 1.4.4 alternative splicing in different cell types

It is estimated that 95%
of multi-exon genes in human undergo AS,3 and the resulting isoforms from one gene could present identical, similar or even opposite
protein functions.

The liver is the largest metabolic organ of the mammals and participates in multiple biological functions, the majority of
which are performed by parenchymal cells, also named hepatocytes
(HCs), occupying approximately 80% of the liver volume.12 The
remainders are nonparenchymal cells (NPCs), including the liver
sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSECs), the Kupffer cells (KCs), the hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) and several rare cell types.


Thus, in our study, we obtained highly purified
liver cells and applied RNA-Seq to build the first dataset of cell-typespecific transcriptomic profiling. Next, we comprehensively compared the splicing patterns between the four hepatic cell types and
analyzed their biological characteristics. Furthermore, we identified
the cell-type-specific splicing factors that dominated the splicing patterns and functional characteristics in respective cell types


C57BL/6 male mice (8–10 weeks old)

--> _male_ cell types then


The genome-wide extent of AS was analyzed by searching against
known splicing junctions. We focused on five common types of AS
(Supplementary Fig. S1B). The AS events identified in our data
achieved an average coverage of 81.5% of all known events in the
Ensembl database 

We attempted to reveal the functions of cell-specific isoforms of Tak1 in
distinct cell types. Tak1 has four main variants generated by AS
(Supplementary Fig. S5A), depending on the spliced-in or -out of
exon 12 and exon 16.29 We provided a detailed splicing map of exon
12 of Tak1 (TGF-activated kinase 1) gene.


hile in NPCs,
Rbfox2, as well as some other splicing factors, made Tak1-A the
main isoform. Tak1-A bound to Tab2 more easily than Tak1-B did,
activated the downstream JNK and p38 pathways. Thus, Tak1-A
exhibited the immune process regulation properties in NPCs. These
observations indicated that the regulation of CEEs by AS was closely
associated with the cell-type-specific functions and had important
roles in the formation of liver cell-type specificities.

n summary, our research provided the first profile of cell-typespecific transcriptome and splicing patterns in mouse liver and confirmed that the cell identities were largely defined by cell-type-specific
AS events. These events altered isoform functions through remodeling
PPI networks and modifying PTM sites and were controlled by a series
of splicing factors. Analysis of cell-type-specific splicing enabled us to
better demonstrating the functional landscape of hepatic cell types.
Spliced genes played diverse roles in the corresponding cell types by differential exon usage even if they exhibited similar expression profiling at
the gene level. This information improved our knowledge of additional
regulation and appropriate composition of hepatic cell types.


# Comments

Cool bulk RNA-seq article

## Tags
1.4.4. Types of knowledge about cell types


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q50084595)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q50084595)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q50084595/P921%3BP4510)  
