
Early emergence of cortical interneuron diversity in the mouse embryo.
======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q50422244]  
  
Publication date : 22 of February, 2018  

# Highlights

Transcriptomes of embryonic interneurons showed similarities to adult classes of differentiated interneurons, thus dividing the immature embryonic interneurons themselves into classes. 

Here, we use single-cell transcriptomics to study the origins of this diversity in the mouse. We identify distinct types of progenitor cells and newborn neurons in the ganglionic eminences, the embryonic proliferative regions that give rise to cortical interneurons.


we dissected tissue from three regions in the mouse subpallium, the dorsal and ventral medial ganglionic eminence (dMGE and vMGE, respectively) and the caudal ganglionic eminence (CGE).

We took a semisupervised clustering approach to explore variation across all progenitor cells and identified progenitor clusters with characteristic regional and developmental patterns (fig. S6, A to D). 

Fig. 2 Characterization of progenitor cell types in the embryonic germinal zones.
(A) Visualization of progenitor cell diversity by t-SNE.

--> Lot's of types!

The adult mouse cerebral cortex contains more than 20 distinct classes of interneurons with characteristic transcriptional profiles (7, 8). We asked whether any of these classes of interneurons would be identifiable shortly after becoming postmitotic in the GE.

These groups correspond to anatomically and electrophysiologically defined classes of cortical interneurons, including several types of PV+ basket cells, SST+ Martinotti and non-Martinotti cells, VIP+ basket and bipolar interneurons, and neurogliaform cells (8, 22).

Our analysis identifies early markers for many different classes of cortical interneurons, whose functional validation may eventually illuminate the mechanisms regulating the differentiation of GABAergic interneurons into specific subtypes and, through comparative analyses, inform the use of stem cell biology for the generation of distinct classes of human cortical interneurons (28, 29). Thus, core aspects of interneuron identity are drafted early in development, forming the foundation on which later interactions with other neurons must function.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q50422244)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q50422244)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q50422244/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q50422244&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.AAR6821)  
