
Developmental diversification of cortical inhibitory interneurons.
==================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q50420532]  
  
Publication date : 05 of March, 2018  

# Highlights

By integrating datasets across developmental time points, we identified shared sources of transcriptomic heterogeneity between adult interneurons and their precursors, and uncovered the embryonic emergence of cardinal interneuron subtypes. Our analysis revealed that the transcription factor Mef2c, which is linked to various neuropsychiatric and neurodevelopmental disorders, delineates early precursors of parvalbumin-expressing neurons, and is essential for their development

Here we combine multiple single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) approaches with genetic fate-mapping techniques to explore the emer-gence of cellular heterogeneity during early mouse development.

We manually dissected ganglionic eminence cells from wild-type mouse embryos at embryonic day (E)13.5 (for the MGE) or E14.5 (for the CGE and LGE)

After cell dissociation, we used droplet-based single-cell mRNA sequencing (Drop-seq)9 to sequence the transcriptomes of 5,622  single cells from the MGE, 7,401 from the CGE and 8,543 from the LGE, from replicate experiments, observing on average 1,626 unique molecular identifiers (UMIs) per cell. 

 To independently confirm the associ-ation of the maturation trajectory with real time, we used FlashTag technology14 to fluorescently label cells in the ventricular zone1

 he MGE and CGE are known to produce non-overlapping types of cortical interneurons.

 To confirm that cells passing through precursor state 1 give rise to cortical interneurons, we used genetic fate-mapping strategies to enrich for postmitotic cells derived from ganglionic eminences at E18.5 for scRNA-seq. Using a correlation-based distance metric (Supplementary Methods) we found that, as expected20, more than 80% of Dlx6a-cre fate-mapped cortical cells at E18.5 were assigned to precursor state 1, on the basis of their expression of canonical regulators of interneuron development (Fig. 3i, Extended Data Fig. 5). The remaining Dlx6a-cre fate-mapped.

 , Graph-based clustering of interneurons from the adult mouse visual cortex (data from ref. 22 and Allen Cell Types Database, http://celltypes.brain-map.org/download (2015)). Cluster names denote cardinal classes associated with canonical markers (for example Pvalb or Sst), with additional enumerated subdivisions (for example, Vip-1 or Vip-2). 


On examination of the earliest stages, we observed a separation of Pvalb- and Sst-precursor cells within the E13.5 post-mitotic populations (Fig. 4d), and identified transcriptomic markers that were conserved into adulthood (early marker genes for Pvalb neurons: Mef2c, Erbb4, Plcxd3; early marker genes for Sst neurons: Sst, Ts p a n 7, Satb1; Fig. 4e, Extended Data Fig. 7

By E18.5, all cardinal types of interneurons could be identified, and additional subtypes appeared to be transcriptionally specified as well (Fig. 4e, Extended Data Fig. 9).

Therefore, the genes we identified as defining embryonic cardinal types are candi-dates for the regulation of interneuron fate determination and main-tenance across species.

Our findings mark an initial but important step towards the goal of ultimately linking specific genes to their aetiology in neurodevelop-mental and neuropsychiatric disorders.



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q50420532)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q50420532)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q50420532/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q50420532&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/NATURE25999)  
