
Wikidata and Libraries: Facilitating Open Knowledge
===================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q52235186]  
  
Publication date : 26 of April, 2018  

# Highlights

This chapter focuses on Wikidata and its potential uses for libraries. We hope to inspire information professionals (librarians, archivists, library practitioners) to take the next step and start a conversation with their institutions and colleagues to free their data by contributing it to an open knowledge base like Wikidata.

. Changes made by editors to the structured data of one Wikipedia needed to be manually made in all other Wikipedias, which proved cumbersome. Now editors are able to make these changes in Wikidata, allowing all Wikimedia projects to use that structured data

 For instance, Wikipedias can make use of Wikidata’s data to maintain their infoboxes1with the most up-to-date information.

Wikidata contains a collection of entities, which are “the basic elements of the knowledge base” and which can be either properties or items(“Wikibase/DataModel/Primer,” 2017).

 It is also useful to list under aliases all alternative names by which an entity is known. This is helpful in cases where a search is made for a name that is not the one assigned to the label.For instance, the item Q65,with the label “Los Angeles,”has the following aliases: L.A., LA, Pink City, The town of Our Lady the Queen of the Angels of the Little Portion, and Los Angeles, California.


 Anyone can contribute to Wikidata, but why is it important for information professionals to use their expertise to contribute to a project like Wikidata? In the library community, we collect, describe, organize, preserve, and provide access to physical and digital materials. Information professionalshave long created and contributed authority records to help disambiguate personal, corporate, and jurisdictional names by providing a standardized form for them

Additionally, informationprofessionals have the experience and necessary skills to join efforts in exploring how to model FRBR (Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records)-like concepts for all types of bibliographic materials in Wikidata.

 Histropedia is one example of how the data can be used and presentedin a more meaningful way. It aims to be a “new type of website” where a combination of data from Wikidata and Wikipedia is used to generate timelines.

 Anotherexample of a tool that was built to display Wikidata’s data is Reasonator. It acts as a “discovery interface” that brings together all the data available in Wikidata related to an item and includes images, audio, and maps.

 Establishing a connection between library institutions and their collections in Wikidata is just a small but crucial step in preparing the groundwork that would facilitate discovery and the potential for experimentation in current and future projects. 

 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q52235186)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q52235186)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q52235186/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q52235186&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
