
DAFi: A directed recursive data filtering and clustering approach for improving and interpreting data clustering identification of cell populations from polychromatic flow cytometry data.
===========================================================================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q52582833]  
  
Publication date : 17 of April, 2018  

# Highlights
 Certain types of user-defined cell populations are also difficult to identify by fully automated data clustering analysis. Both are roadblocks before a cytometry lab can adopt the data clustering approach for cell population identification in routine use. We found that combining recursive data filtering and clustering with constraints converted from the user manual gating strategy can effectively address these two issues. We named this new approach DAFi: Directed Automated Filtering and Identification of cell populations. Design of DAFi preserves the data-driven characteristics of unsupervised clustering for identifying novel cell subsets, but also makes the results interpretable to experimental scientists through mapping and merging the multidimensional data clusters into the user-defined two-dimensional gating hierarchy.

The clusters with centroids within the hyper-polygon (the magenta cluster and the blue cluster) are merged in Step 3, before the merged data (colored in red, Fig. 1A) is output to the next run of clustering analysis in Step 4. The procedure repeats until all user-defined cell populations are identified. Both predefined and novel cell populations are organized within an easily interpreted gating hierarchy (Fig. 1B). We refer to this type of approach as directed unsupervised clustering. Figure 1C and 1D illustrates the challenge of identifying the difficult-to-resolve CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) using either manual gating analysis or the existing data clustering methods in a single run. 

We reanalyzed the B-cell phenotyping FCM data of SDY180 using DAFi (K-means clustering used with K = 500). Dot plots of CD19+ B cells (Fig. 4A, blue) and Plasmablasts (Fig. 4B, magenta) identified by DAFi are shown with their defining rectangle boundaries.
 Identification of Known and Novel Cell-Based Biomarkers for Latent Tuberculosis Infection
In previous sections, we showed how DAFi can improve the identification of user-defined cell populations. In this section, we assessed whether DAFi can be used to improve the identification of cell populations that have not been defined in a manual gating strategy.


Pop#18 is CD25-CCR6+CCR4loCXCR3+ and Pop#28 is CD25-CCR6-CCR4-CXCR3+. Their corresponding positions in the predefined cell type hierarchy are indicated with the red arrows “novel” in Figure 5B.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q52582833)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q52582833)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q52582833&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/CYTO.A.23371)  
