
Cell type transcriptome atlas for the planarian Schmidtea mediterranea.
=======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q52576606]  
  
Publication date : 19 of April, 2018  

# Highlights
They could then predict gene programs that are specifically turned on and off along the tree, and they used this approach to study how the cell types behaved during regeneration. These whole-animal transcriptome “atlases” are a powerful way to study metazoan biology.

We reasoned that it might be possible, given these advances, to determine the transcriptomes of essentially every cell type of a complete organism possessing an unknown number of cell types. The planarian Schmidtea mediterranea, famous for its regeneration ability, is an attractive case study for such an undertaking.

We used the SCS method Drop-seq to determine the transcriptomes for 66,783 individual cells from adult planarians. We locally saturated cell type coverage by iteratively sequencing distinct body regions and assessing the frequency of known rare cell types in the data. 

Planarians also constitutively and regionally express dozens of genes that have
roles in positional information (18). These genes, referred to
as positional control genes (PCGs), are expressed in a complex spatial map spanning anterior-posterior (AP), mediallateral (ML), and dorsal-ventral (DV) axes (18), and their
expression is largely restricted to muscle (19)

Planarians contain 105-106 cells (11), and yet some cell types are extremely rare, such as the ~100 photoreceptor neurons of eyes (20)

We targeted cell type saturation by assessing coverage of known, rare cell types during iterative rounds of cell isolation and sequencing in a region-by-region approach. In total, 25 separate

Neoblasts are abundant and express canonical marker genes such as smedwi-1 (25), vasa (26), and bruli (27) (Fig. 1C and fig. S5, A and B). Neoblasts are cycling cells and consequently show enrichment in expression of S/G2/M cell cycle markers (fig. S5C). To identify the transcriptomes of potential neoblast subpopulations, 12,212 cells with smedwi-1 expression ≥ 2.5 (ln(UMI-per-10,000+1)) were selected in silico and subclustered (Fig. 2A, fig. S6A, and supplementary materials). 

Cell lineages for many planarian cell types are largely uncharacterized. Following tissue-type subclustering, smedwi-1+ cells were present with expression high locally in resultant t-SNE plots; expression gradually declined in level in cells across subclusters (Fig. 2, M and N). 

Ultrastructural studies suggested that the planarian intestine contains two cell types,
absorptive enterocytes and secretory goblet cells (37, 38). 

 Accordingly, inhibition
of the transcription factor-encoding PTF1A (dd_6869) gene,
which had enriched expression in candidate transition
states for the outer intestine cluster, strongly reduced this
cell population while not affecting absorptive enterocytes of
the intestine (Fig. 3E).


Planarians constitutively express dozens of genes associated
with patterning (PCGs) in complex spatial patterns across
body axes (18)

 To facilitate such study, we developed an online resource that generates cluster expression data, for any gene,
across all clusters and subclusters (digiworm.wi.mit.edu).
Case study model organisms proved valuable testing
grounds for developing approaches to complete genome
sequencing - these planarian SCS data demonstrate an approach to near complete cell-type transcriptome identification that could be applied broadly to diverse organisms with
varying degrees of information about cell-type composition.
The remarkable ability of single-cell RNA sequencing to
reach near-to-complete saturation of transcriptome identification for the cell types of a complete animal is a new and
powerful approach for describing the anatomy of complete
organisms at the molecular level. 



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q52576606)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q52576606)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q52576606/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q52576606&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.AAQ1736)  
