
The dynamics of gene expression in vertebrate embryogenesis at single-cell resolution.
======================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q52560248]  
  
Publication date : 26 of April, 2018  

# Highlights

We focused on thewestern claw-toed frog,Xenopus tropicalis,which serves as one of the best-studied mod-el systems of early vertebrate development.We profiled these embryos from just beforethe onset of zygotic transcription up to a pointat which dozens of distinct cell types haveformed encompassing progenitors of most major organs.

To establish aspects of devel-opment general to vertebrates, we addition-ally incorporated data from the copublishedpaper by Wagneret al. on zebrafish embryos,which separated from frogs about 400 mil-lion years ago.

We profiled 136,966 single-celltranscriptomesoverthefirstdayoflifeofXenopus tropicalis.

--> damn
he result-ing resource is available in an interactiveonline browser that allows in silico explora-tion of any gene in any cell state (tinyurl.com/scXen2018)

The fertilized egg was once itself thoughtto be very complex, concealing the spatial andcompositional differentiation of the adult. How-ever, it is now clear that the egg is a rathersimple cell, and the complexity of the embryoand adult arises by bootstrapping: repeatedlyexploiting spatial asymmetries to build the com-plex embryo by stages. 

We then annotatedeach cluster by matching cluster-specific genes to>2000 in situ measurements of marker genes forembryonic cell types documented on theXenopusBioinformatics database (Xenbase) (5)(seeDataS1)

We additionally shared our annotations withexperts in theXenopusresearch community, con-vened in part for that purpose at a recent Jamboreemeeting, who helped to standardize our cell-state nomenclature and choice of annotations.In total, we identified 87 distinct cell-type an-notations, many of which persisted in clustersacross multiple time points (average of 2.9 timepoints each) (Fig. 2C).

Of these 87 states, 69 cor-responded unambiguously to a specific Xenbaseanatomical term, whereas the remaining 18 statescorrespond to finer structure (i.e., cell subtypes)or unidentified cell states within these anatom-ically defined tissues. 

Of all cross–time point edges inferred by the algorithm (Fig.2C), we could confirm 234 (91%) by comparisonto Xenbase anatomy ontology (XAO) (8,9)andtheliterature(seeDataS2)

(C) Cell-state tree showing all inferreddevelopmental transitions. Generated by applying the mapping algorithm in (A)

--> Nice, this is kind of a tree indeed, as it is developmental

. Trajectories of differentiating ionocytescan be seen in both species, whereas ciliated cellsexpressing foxj1, goblet cells expressing itln1, andsmall secretory cells expressing met (fig. S14),each of which is an important component of theXenopusepidermis, are absent in zebrafish

Thirtytissues could be matched with high confidence,jointly covering 66 of 87Xenopusstates (79% ofcells) and 83 of 122 zebrafish states (83% ofcells)

Given the close association and conservation oftranscription factors with differentiation, andhence cell type, we asked two questions: (i) Howare transcription factors deployed across celltypes and across time during development? (ii) How, at the level of genes, do new cell iden-tities emerge at branch points in development?These questions can be examined here in dozensof cell states and in the unperturbed setting ofthe embryo, rather than in cell culture.

 (C) (Left) Ortholog genes across species have variable conservation ofcell-state–specific expression. Just 30% of self-similar orthologs are con-served at a 95% FDR compared with random gene pairs. (Right) 

Fig. 4. Similarities and differences in developmental cell-state hierar-chies and gene expression between frog and fish.(A)Xenopusandzebrafish cell-state trees aligned by orthologous cell states (red shading).Gray/white stripes provide a visual guide. 

--> A lot of cell types!

 Programmingof cell identity throughcombinatorial reuse of TFs. TFA is reused (red) in combinationwith TF B to generate anew fate. HalfofDETFsare induced more than oncein early frog and fish development.

Our single-cell data offers an opportunity toreexamine these alternative hypotheses with ahigh-resolution view of the intermediate statesbetween blastula and neurula stages in neuralcrest development. To support the“retentionmodel,”we specifically searched for a subsetof cells that maintain a blastula gene expressionprogram, distinct from the remaining early ec-toderm. To further increase the likelihood offinding such cells, we supplemented our wholeembryo time series with additional scRNA-seqdata (9308 cells) collected from tissue that wedissected from the neural plate border region,which is fated to become neural crest, of stage11 embryos, immediately before the expressionof neural crest genes (total of 15,426 stage 11cells).

n this study, we looked for general featuresof development that might be difficult to ap-preciate from examination of individual line-ages. In bothXenopusand zebrafish, we observeda transition from pervasive multilineage geneexpression during gastrulation to more specificand combinatorial deployment of differentiationprograms later

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q52560248)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q52560248)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q52560248/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q52560248&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.AAR5780)  
