
Single-cell transcriptomics of the mouse kidney reveals potential cellular targets of kidney disease.
=====================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q52603808]  
  
Publication date : 05 of April, 2018  

# Highlights

 we characterized 57,979 cells from healthy mouse kidneys using unbiased single-cell RNA sequencing


We  next  performed  several  important  quality  control  analyses  to  validate  our  map.  First,  we  ensured  that  cells  from  the  seven  kidneys  were  distributed  evenly  in  all  16  clusters  and  each  cluster  contained  cells  from  more  than  four  experiments  (fig.  S1)

--> Nice touch of class

To define the identity of each cell cluster, we generated clus-ter-specific  marker  genes  by  performing  differential  gene  expression  analysis  (Fig.  1B,  fig.  S6  and  table  S1)  (20).  In  many  cases,  the  unbiased  cluster  identifier  was  a  known  

cell-type  specific  marker,  such  as  the  vascular  endothelial  growth factor receptor 2 (Kdr) for endothelial cells, Nephrin (Nphs1)  and  Podocin  (Nphs2)  for  podocytes,  Na/K/2Cl  co-transporter  (Slc12a1)  for  ascending  loop  of  Henle  and  thia-zide  sensitive  sodium-chloride  cotransporter  (Slc12a3)  for  distal  convoluted  tubule.


Identification  of  a  novel  cell  type  in  the  kidney  collect-ing duct

his  compartment  is  com-prised of at least three distinct cell types: the principal cells (PC),  which  are  responsible  for  sodium,  water  reabsorption  and potassium secretion; and the alpha and beta intercalat-ed cells (A-IC and B-IC), which are responsible for acid and alkali  secretion,  respectively.  We  identified  aquaporin  2  (Aqp2) and H+-ATPase subunit (Atp6v1g3) as the key mark-er  genes  for  clusters  6  and  7,  defining  these  clusters  as  PC  and IC cells (Figs. 1 and 3A, B)

--> 1.4.4. Types of knowledge about cell types



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q52603808)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q52603808)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q52603808/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q52603808&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
