
Cell type discovery using single-cell transcriptomics: implications for ontological representation.
===================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q52625486]  

# Highlights

The Cell Ontology (CL) is a biomedical ontology  to provide reference nomenclature for in vivo cell types in humans and major model organisms. However, the advent of high-content single-cell transcriptomics for cell type characterization has resulted in a number of challenges for their representation in the CL.

Propose a strategy for defining cell types within the CL.

Initial efforts toward human neuronal cell type discovery focused on identifying broad lineages. Comparing results between these studies has been challenging given the different areas and layers of cortex sampled.

Markers individually are still not specific enough to define discrete cell type classes at the level of granularity revealed by clustering of the sc/snRNAseq data. In fact, there has been surprisingly limited overlap in gene sets specific for individual cell type clusters between studies.

Villani et al. used fluorescence-activated cell sorting and scRNAseq to delineate six different dendritic cell subtypes (DC1–6) and four different monocyte subtypes.

--> A case of deductive reasoning (at least as reported) in assessment of cell type.

For example, in the two studies focused on the identification of dendritic cell subtypes, it is unclear if the cDC1 and cDC2 subtypes identified by See et al. correspond to the DC1 and DC2 subtypes identified by Villani et al. Indeed, the only way to make this determination would be to perform a de novo comparative analysis of the transcriptional profiles from both studies.

One of the key recommendations was to establish a standard strategy for defining cell type classes that combine three essential components:

- The minimum set of necessary and sufficient marker genes selectively expressed by the cell type
- A parent cell class in the CL
- A specimen source description (anatomic structure þ species).

For one of the inhibitory interneuron cell types defined in this study, we were able to connect the distinct transcriptional profile with a previous cell type defined based on its unique cellular morphology — the Rosehip cell.

- Colloquial name: rosehip neuron 
- Alternative name: KIT-expressing MTG cortical layer 1 GABAergic interneuron, human
- Definition: A human MTG cortical layer 1 GABAergic interneuron that selectively expresses KIT, NTNG1 and POU6F2 mRNAs.

--> I like this degree of rigorousness. 

These informal textual definitions can then be converted into formal ontological definitions, represented in OWL as equivalent classes, using a set of logical axioms that combine assertions about the parent cell class (interneuron), anatomic locations of the neuron cell body (soma), functional capacity of the cell type (gamma-aminobutyric acid secretion) and marker gene expression (expresses some KIT) requirements.

We are now establishing an extension ontology module containing provisional definitions for novel cell types that we and other research groups will contribute. In this way we will ensure the integrity of the CL reference, while still allowing for the rapid expansion of its content to accommodate cell types defined via these new technologies.

For biomedical ontologies to stay relevant, it will be critical for ontology developers to establish procedures for the processing and incorporation of representations derived from these data-intensive technologies into reference ontologies in a timely fashion. 

# Comments


Nice gathering of articles and conclusions regarding cell types! Tasty!

Number of cell types is way too big for a small group of dedicated curators. 

Also mentions of timely fashion. 

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q52625486)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q52625486)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q52625486/P921%3BP4510)  
