
Heritability enrichment of specifically expressed genes identifies disease-relevant tissues and cell types.
===========================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q52720499]  

# Highlights

We introduce an approach to identify disease-relevant tissues and cell types by analyzing gene expression data together with genome-wide association study (GWAS) summary statistics.

We analyzed gene expression datasets that allowed us to achieve higher resolution within a system3,19–21 and identified enriched brain regions, brain cell types and immune cell types for several brain- and immune- related diseases and traits; we validated several of our immune enrichments using independent chromatin data. Our results under- score that a heritability-based framework applied to gene expression data allows us to achieve high-resolution enrichments, even for very polygenic traits. 

292 immune cell types.

There is a long-standing scientific debate as to whether migraine has a primarily neurological or vascular basis. We analyzed GWAS summary statistics for migraine with aura, migraine without aura, and migraine (all subtypes). The migraine (all subtypes) dataset contained the datasets for migraine with aura and for migraine with- out aura, as well as data for a large number of additional subjects whose subtype was unknown.

To address the question of the relative importance of brain cell
types, as opposed to brain regions, we analyzed the same set of traits using a publicly available dataset of specifically expressed genes that were identified from different brain cell types purified from mouse forebrain.

--> Quick shortcut for cells identifiable as belonging to different cell types.


We investigated cell-type-specific enrichments for these traits using gene expression data from the Immunological Genome (ImmGen) project, which contains microarray data on 292 immune cell types from mice.

We cannot conclusively say whether gene expression or chromatin
data are preferable when both types of data are available for the same tissues and cell types.

Another limitation of our method is that its results may be dif-
ficult to validate.
# Comments
