
A Taxonomy of Part-Whole Relations
==================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q54248976]  
  
Publication date : 01 of October, 1987  

# Highlights
A taxonomy of port-whole or  meronymic relations  is  developed to explain the ordinary  English-speaker’s  use of the term  “part of” and its cognates. 
--> - 1.2.2. Computational ontologies and their methods

1. component-integral object (pedal-bike).  2. member-collection (ship-fleet), 3. portion-mass (slice-pie),  4. stuff-object (steel-car). 5. feature-activity (poying-shopping), and 6. place-oreo (Everglades-Florida)


The head is part of the body; ” “Bicycles are partly aluminum;” “Pistons are parts of engines; ” “Dating is a part of adolescence;” “The parts of a flower include the stamen, the petals, etc. .

From a logical point of view, meronymic relations are usually understood to express strict partial ordering relations. Strict partial ordering relation- ships are transitive, irreflexive, and antisymmetrical  (Halmos, 1960; Moore, 1967).

Network models of memory have frequently confused meronymy (wing-canary) with other re- lations such as attribution tie/low-canary); for example, (Collins & Quillian, 1969).

Functional (+)/Nonfunctlonaf I-): Parts are/are not in a specific spatial/temporal position with respect to each other  which supports their  functional role with respect to the whole. 
Homeomerous (+)/Nonhomeomerous (-): Ports are similar/dissimilar to each other  and to the whole to which they belong. Separable (+)/Inseparable (-): Ports can/cannot be physically  disconnected, in princi- ple,  from  the whole to which they ore connected

lc) The refrigerator is part of the kitchen.* 
Cruse (1986) follows Lyons (1977) in distinguishing between optional and necessary  parts, though Cruse prefers the terms “facultative” and “canonical” parts/whole. It is normal for fingers to be part of hands, but it is possible to have a hand which is missing some fingers. Thus, fingers are not logically  necessary  parts of hands, but canonical parts of them since they  are normally  parts of them and their absence indicates a defect in the whole. Similarly, it is possible for a kitchen to lack a refrigerator, though in this case it is not clear 

Membership in a collection differs from componenthood in not requiring that members perform a particular function or possess a particular struc- tural  arrangement in relation to each other and to their wholes, as in, 
(2a) A tree is part of a forest. 
(2b) A juror is part of a jury. 
(2~) This ship is part of a fleet.


2.3 Portion-Mass Portions of masses, extensive objects, and physical  dimensions are different from components of objects and members of collections in being “home- omerous, ” that is, having parts which are similar to each other and to the wholes which they comprise, as in, 
(3a) This slice is part of a pie. 
(3b) A yard is part of a mile. 
(3~) This hunk is part of my clay.

he stuff relation is a type of meronymic relation which is most often ex- pressed using the “is partly” frame, as in, 
(4a) A martini is partly alcohol.
 (4b) The bike is partly steel. 
 (4~) Water is partly hydrogen. 

When something is made of a single stuff “is partly” cannot be used. Instead the relation must be expressed by “made of,” as in, (4d) The lens is made of glass *(4e) The lens is partly glass. 

Cruse distinguishes  ‘ingredients’ from ‘constituents’:  “the ingredients  of X are the sub-  stances  that one starts out  with when one prepares  X,  whereas  the constituents  of X are the substances  which enter  into the final composition.  .Thus, although alcohol is  a constituent  of wine,  it is  not  an ingredient,  because it is  not  used in preparation,  but  arises  naturally  as  a result  of preparation”  (Cruse,  1986.  p. 177). 

2.5 Feature-Activity The existence of a fifth type of meronymic relation is indicated by the use of “part” to designate the features or phases of activities and processes, as in, 
(5a) Paying is part of shopping. 
(5b) Bidding is part of playing bridge. 
(5~) Ovulation is part of the menstrual  cycle

--> process - process in the Relations Ontology

2.6 Place-Area A sixth type of meronymy is the relation between areas and special places and locations within them, as in, 
(6a) The Everglades are part of Florida.
(6b) An oasis is a part of a desert. 
(6~) The baseline is part of a tennis court

3.1 Topological Inclusion A relation which may be confused with meronymy is the topological relation between a container, area, or temporal  duration and that which is contained in it, as in, 
(7a) The wine is in the cooler. 
(7b) The prisoner is in the cell. 
(7~) West Berlin is in East Germany. 
(7d) The meeting is in the morning. 

--> Interesting for organs. Cells in organs are part of (I'd argue) as organs are made by cells to a large extent. They are mostly facultative at the level of instances. At the level of classes, I wouldn't know. 

Class inclusion or hyponymy is usually expressed in the frames, “Xs are type of Y, ” “Xs are Ys, ” “X is a kind of Y ,” and “X is a Y .” (Cruse, 1986, p. 89; Lyons, 1977, p. 292; Miller & Johnson-Laird, 1976, p. 241) as in, (8a) Cars are a type of vehicle. (8b) Roses are flowers. (8~) Theft is a crime. (8d) Fear is an emotion. Class inclusion and meron

--> Mix of instance of and subclass of.


lass inclusion and meronymy are most difficult to distinguish in the case of activities and abstract nouns which can be ambiguous as to whether they are to be taken as expressing class inclusion or meronymy (Lyons, 1977, p. 314-316), as in, (9a) Frying is part of/a type of cooking. (9b) Honesty is part of/a type of virtue. 

3.4 Attachment Pairs such as ear-earring, chimney-TVantenna, and fishing line-hook which express the relation of attachment can be confused with meronymy, for ex- ample, (1 la) Earrings are attached to ears.

he transitivity of the class inclusion relation enables it to support valid syllogistic inferences, such as, 
(14a) Hamburg is a city. 
(14b) Cities are human settlements. 
(14~) Hamburg is a human settlement


me argument, as in (17), the “part of” relation is not transitive and the inference is not valid. 
(17a) Simpson’s arm is part of Simpson.
 (17b) Simpson is part of the Philosophy Department. 
 *(17c) Simpson’s arm is part of the Philosophy Department

(18a) The head is part of the statue. 
(18b) The statue is part of the Etruscan collection. 
?(18c) The head is part of the Etruscan collection.’ 
ile it may in fact be true that the head of the statue might be regarded as

he approach we  have taken here has been to view the semantic relations found in network and frame theories as analysable into more primitive ele- ments. Applying this approach to the analysis of meronymy has enabled us to distinguish several  different types of meronymic relations, to distinguish meronymy from other semantic relations, to account for apparent failures of transitivity in merological  syllogisms, and to explain the curious patterns of transitivity among inclusion relations. 


# Comments
Also good introduction to formalization.

Generally mixes instances and classes, but that is maybe a second level.


I could make an study of how these different relations are currently modeled on Wikidata. 

Beautiful article.
## Tags
- 1.2.2. Computational ontologies and their methods

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q54248976)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q54248976)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q54248976/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q54248976&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q54248976/P921%3BP4510)  
