
Evolutionary trade-offs, Pareto optimality, and the geometry of phenotype space.
================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q54337677]  

# Highlights

Using the Pareto front concept from economics and engineering, we find that
best–trade-off phenotypes are weighted averages of archetypes—phenotypes specialized for
single tasks. For two tasks, phenotypes fall on the line connecting the two archetypes, which
could explain linear trait correlations, allometric relationships, as well as bacterial gene-expression patterns. For three tasks, phenotypes fall within a triangle in phenotype space, whose vertices are the archetypes, as evident in morphological studies, including on Darwin’s finches. Tasks can be inferred from measured phenotypes based on the behavior of organisms nearest the archetypes.

The Pareto front is typically a small region of
morphospace. This may explain the long-standing
observation that most of morphospace is empty
(7): Phenotypes such as animal shapes found in
nature fill only a small fraction of morphospace.

Thus, the archetypes correspond to
the ends of the observed line segment: a herbivore archetype with equal-sized molars, and a
carnivore archetype with molars in the ratio 2:1:0.
Omnivore molars are weighted averages of these
archetypes. As in many morphological studies,
the traits here are normalized to account for organism size:

We find evidence for such triangular suites of
variation in several classic studies of animal morphology and evolution. In these studies, there
was no theory to explain why the data resemble a riangle. The species near the vertices of the triangles have distinct behavior that suggests which
task is optimized by each archetype (Fig. 3, A to C). 
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q54337677)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q54337677)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q54337677/P921%3BP4510)  
