
Submit a Topic Page to PLOS Computational Biology and Wikipedia
===============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q54655231]  
  
Publication date : 31 of May, 2018  

# Highlights
Six years on, PLOS Computational Biology has published 11 Topic Pages covering a good
range of subjects, from the Hypercycle to Approximate Bayesian Computation. The published
articles have been widely viewed on Wikipedia as well as in the journal and well received by
the community.
We are welcoming submissions for further PLOS Computational Biology Topic Pages. We
are looking for topics in computational biology that are of interest to our readership, the
broader scientific community, and the public at large and that are not yet covered or insufficiently covered (i.e., exist as a ‘stub’) in Wikipedia. Last year, PLOS Genetics joined the Topic
Pages initiative, as detailed in this blog post.

We are also exploring how the Topic Pages approach could be extended to include
Wikidata, the community-curated database connecting concepts covered in any Wikipedia
article with the Semantic Web

-->  1.3.3. Wikidata as a platform for representation of biological knowledge

Conversely, what workflows allow us to collect
information about such concepts in Wikidata, to interlink it with related information, to validate it, and to keep it up to date? Or, how can the data from Wikidata be explored or put to use
in other contexts relevant to computational biology? We are working on establishing the editorial workflows to handle such Wikidata-focused Topic Pages and would welcome submissions
to test these waters. For some inspiration, we suggest taking a look at Wikidata-based tools for
browsing microbial genomes [2], scholarly publications [3], or software and file formats [4].

. We wanted to make use of the
chance to promote the page using the ‘Did you know. . .‘ section on the Wikipedia homepage,
which highlighted important new or significantly improved articles for 24 hours (in 2016 it
was 12 hours). To be accepted for this section, we had to pass a strict review process by experienced Wikipedia editors. This process helped us to increase the quality of the article even
more, primarily by adjusting the style and references to Wikipedia standards. When the page
was finally promoted on 2 May 2016, it was visited by over 12,000 people in a single day,
becoming the third most popular ‘Did you know . . .’ article in May (see Fig 2).
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q54655231)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q54655231)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q54655231/P921%3BP4510)  
