
Identification of research hypotheses and new knowledge from scientific literature.
===================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q55440752]  
  
Publication date : 25 of June, 2018  

# Highlights
Meta-Knowledge (MK)

In this paper, we describe a novel, supervised method to extract new MK dimensions that encode Research Hypotheses
(an author’s intended knowledge gain) and New Knowledge (an author’s findings). The method incorporates various
features, including a combination of simple MK dimensions.


The association is firstly introduced in (1) as a hypothesis
to be investigated. In (2), which is taken from the same
paper [1], the putative association is backed up by initial
experimental evidence. Sentence (3) comes from a paper
published 10 years later [2], by which time the association
is presented as widely accepted knowledge, presumably on
the basis of many further positive experimental results.

(1) ‘To investigate the role of Interleukin-17 (IL-17) in
the pathogenesis of psoriasis...
(2) ‘These findings indicate that up-regulated
expression of IL-17 might be involved in the
pathogenesis of psoriasis.’
(3) ‘IL-17 is a critical factor in the pathogenesis of
psoriasis and other inflammatory diseases.’


There is a strong need to identify different types of emerging knowledge, such as those shown in sentences (1–2),
in a number of different scenarios. It has been shown
elsewhere that incorporating this type of information
improves the automated curation of biomedical networks
and models


The GENIA-MK annotation scheme defines five distinct core dimensions of MK for events, each of which has
a number of possible values, as shown in Fig. 2:
1. Knowledge Type, which categorises the knowledge
that the author wishes to express into one of:
Observation, Investigation, Analysis, Method, Fact or
Other.
2. Knowledge Source, which encodes whether the
author presents the knowledge as part of their own
work (Current), or whether it is referring to previous
work (Other).
3. Polarity, which is set to Positive if the event took
place, and to Negative if it is negated, i.e., it did not
take place.
4. Manner, which denotes the event’s intensity, i.e.,
High, Low or Neutral.
5. Certainty Level or Uncertainty, which indicates how
certain an event is. It may be certain (L3), probable
(L2) or possible (L1).


Research Hypothesis: A relation or event is
considered as a Research Hypothesis if it encompasses
a statement of the authors’ anticipated knowledge gain


New Knowledge: A relation or event is considered as
New Knowledge if it corresponds to a novel research
outcome resulting from the work the author is
describing

Table 1 Examples of sentences containing research hypotheses
and new knowledge

--> Nice table

Table 4 Types of features used in training the Knowledge Type
classification model

--> Wow, very comprehensive set of features!

y, Uncertainty describes whether an author
presented their results with confidence in their accuracy,
or with some hedging (e.g., use of the words may, possibly, perhaps, etc.). This dimension could have helped to
contribute to the classification of hypotheses (where an
author states that an event may occur) and new knowledge, where we expect an author to be certain about their
results.

r. However, further information may be available in the full paper that has
not been mentioned in the abstract. To access this information we will need to further adapt our techniques and
develop annotated corpora of full papers — this is left for
future work.

We have presented a novel application of text mining
techniques for the discovery of Research Hypotheses and
New Knowledge at the level of events and relations. 

# Comments

Super cool work. Very well written.

## Tags

1.1. The quest for interoperable knowledge
1.2. Formal representation of knowledge

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q55440752)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q55440752)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q55440752/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Identification%20of%20research%20hypotheses%20and%20new%20knowledge%20from%20scientific%20literature.'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
