
A stromal cell population that inhibits adipogenesis in mammalian fat depots
============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q55407585]  
  
Publication date : 20 of June, 2018  

# Highlights

Here, using the resolving power of single-cell transcriptomics19 in a mouse model, we reveal distinct subpopulations of adipose stem and precursor cells in the stromal vascular fraction of subcutaneous adipose tissue. We identify one of these subpopulations as CD142+ adipogenesis-regulatory cells, which can suppress adipocyte formation in vivo and in vitro in a paracrine manner.

CD29, CD34 and SCA1 are expected to enrich for stem cells, and DLK1 has previously been suggested to mark pre-adipocytes

Genes that have previously been associated2 with adipogenesis—such as Pparg, Fasn, Fabp4, Lpl and Fabp12—were expressed at significantly lower levels in Aregs that were subjected to differentiation, when compared to both all ASPCs and to CD142− ASPCs

. We found that the knockdown of Rtp3, Spink2, Fgf12 and Vit significantly increased the differentiation of plated SVF cells, but not cell number (Extended Data Fig. 5c–f and Supplementary Table 19), which suggests that these genes modulate the inhibitory potential of Aregs

e observed significantly larger numbers of mature adipocytes among CD142− cells than among all ASPCs, which suggests that human CD142+ ASPCs also have an inhibitory capacit

By combining staining for CD142 with staining for the stem cell marker SCA1, we identified a small fraction of CD142+SCA1+ cells that are also located perivascularly (Fig. 4b–d and Extended Data Fig. 7e–g, arrows). This is consistent with our gene expression data, which suggest that Aregs constitute a small fraction of all ASPCs as well as a link to blood vessels (Extended Data Figs 1g, 2d and 4l). We therefore hypothesize that the CD142+SCA1+ cells we detected correspond to Aregs.

Our single-cell transcriptomics-based approach using a mouse model revealed at least three cell populations in the subcutaneous ASPC-enriched SVF. The largest one was CD55+, and showed enrichment of the adipogenic stem cell markers Cd34 and Ly6a as well as a high adipogenic differentiation capacity in vitro.




# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q55407585)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q55407585)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q55407585&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-018-0226-8)  
