
GIANT 2.0: genome-scale integrated analysis of gene networks in tissues.
========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q55497654]  
  
Publication date : 01 of July, 2018  

# Highlights

GIANT2 (Genome-wide Integrated Analysis of gene Networks in Tissues) is an interactive web server that enables biomedical researchers to analyze their proteins and pathways of interest and generate hypotheses in the context of genome-scale functional maps of human tissues. 

 With GIANT2, researchers can explore predicted tissue-specific functional roles of genes and reveal changes in those roles across tissues, all through interactive multi-network visualizations and analyses. Additionally, the NetWAS approach available through the server uses tissue-specific/cell-type networks predicted by GIANT2 to re-prioritize statistical associations from GWAS studies and identify disease-associated genes. 

Successful methods by us (10–12) and others (13,14) can integrate these functional genomics data to predict functional interactions in human, many of which are accessible through a web server (13–15). However, these predictions lack tissue-specificity and none of them capture tissue and cell-type specific gene function, critical to understanding the complex and context-specific action of genes.

Additionally, GIANT provides dynamic gene enrichment analysis of the queried network (Figure 1D). Gene Ontology (GO) biological process (17), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (18) pathway and Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) (19) disease-gene enrichments are calculated in real-time as users adjust the visualized network. 





# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q55497654)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q55497654)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q55497654&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/NAR/GKY408)  
