
Getting the Most out of Wikidata: Semantic Technology Usage in Wikipedia’s Knowledge Graph
==========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q56010228]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2018  

# Highlights
Since its inception in late 2012, Wikidata [19] has become one of the largest and most
prominent collections of open data on the web.

The final conclusion was to build the core functionality
on semantic technologies, in particular on RDF and SPARQL, as a mature technology
which can address Wikidata’s need to share, query, and analyse data in a uniform way.
The main reason for this choice was the availability of well-supported free and open
source tools for the main tasks, especially for SPARQL query answering.

Since mid 2015, Wikimedia provides an official public Wikidata SPARQL query service
(WDQS) at http://query.wikidata.org/,9 built on top of the BlazeGraph RDF store and
graph database.10 This backend was chosen after a long discussion, mainly due to its very
good personal support, well-documented code base, high-availability features, and the
standard query language.11 Data served by this endpoint is “live” with a typical update
latency of less than 60 seconds. The service further provides several custom extensions
and features beyond basic SPARQL support, which we describe in this section. Extensive
user documentation with further details is available through the Wikidata Query Service
help portal.12 All software that is used to run WDQS is available online.13

BlazeGraph works for Wikimedia The choice of graph database followed a long
discussion of many systems, and some of the top-ranked choices did not use RDF at all.
While there could have been other successful approaches, BlazeGraph has proven to be
an excellent choice, regarding stability but also (open source) extensibility.
Customisation matters We are convinced that our own extensions to the query service
played an important role in its success. The labelling, support for Wikidata’s special
22 See, e.g., https://tools.wmflabs.org/mix-n-match/
23 http://live.dbpedia.org/sparql
value types (e.g., coordinates on other planets), and Wikidata-aware assistance in the
Web UI improve utility and acceptance of the service.

SPARQL is usable Most of the Wikidata community, including developers, had no
prior contact with SPARQL. An impressive amount of SPARQL-literacy has developed
very quickly. There is extensive documentation and support now, including a community
project Request a Query24 where experts design queries for novices.


SPARQL is affordable Even for such a large site with a custom data model and a large
global user base, the total cost of development and administrative effort, and of hardware
needed for a highly reliable system is affordable

On the research side, we are
exploring how to provide further ontological modelling support for the annotated graph
structure of Wikidata [10,9], but we can see many other areas where Wikidata would
benefit from increased research activities, and we hope that the semantic web community
can still make many more contributions to Wikidata in the future


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q56010228)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q56010228)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q56010228&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-00668-6_23)  
 * [Full text URL](https://iccl.inf.tu-dresden.de/w/images/5/5a/Malyshev-et-al-Wikidata-SPARQL-ISWC-2018.pdf)  
