
Genetic and transcriptional evolution alters cancer cell line drug response
===========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q56550183]  
  
Publication date : 08 of August, 2018  

# Highlights

Human cancer cell lines are the workhorse of cancer research. While cell lines are known to evolve in culture, the extent of the resultant genetic and transcriptional heterogeneity and its functional consequences remain understudied. Here, genomic analyses of 106 cell lines grown in two laboratories revealed extensive clonal diversity. Follow-up comprehensive genomic characterization of 27 strains of the common breast cancer cell line MCF7 uncovered rapid genetic diversification.

Testing of the 27 MCF7 strains against 321 anti-cancer compounds uncovered strikingly disparate drug response: at least 75% of compounds that strongly inhibited some strains were completely inactive in others. This study documents the extent, origin and consequence of genetic variation within cell lines, and provides a framework for researchers to measure such variation in efforts to support maximally reproducible cancer research.

We performed extensive genomic characterization of 27 versions (hereafter called “strains”) of the commonly used estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer cell line MCF7.

Next, we characterized the genetic stability of three wild-type (WT) single cell-derived MCF7 clones and five single cell-derived clones with a “neutral” genetic manipulation (stable expression of a luciferase reporter; Methods, Extended Data Fig. 5e and Supplementary Tables 9–10). Clones derived from the same parental population differed in their mutational landscapes: a median of 15% of the non-silent SNVs detected in the WT parental population (range, 13% to 16%), were not observed in their single cell-derived progeny, or vice versa (Extended Data Fig. 5f–g).

 Similar results were observed based on cytogenetic analysis (Extended Data Fig. 5h–k and Supplementary Table 11), indicating that even single cell-derived clones are genomically unstable.

 To exclude the possibility that the variation observed across MCF7 strains was unique to that cell line, we repeated genomic analyses on 23 strains of the commonly used lung cancer cell line A549 (ref. 23) (Extended Data Fig. 2c–d and Supplementary Tables 16–20). We observed a similar level of molecular variation across these strains (Extended Data Fig. 7). For example, loss of CDKN2A, the most significantly deleted gene in lung adenocarcinomas24, was detected in 5 strains, but normal copy number was retained in the other 18 (Extended Data Fig. 7f).

 . To facilitate routine assessment of cell line diversification, we have created the Cell STRAINER (STRAin INstability profilER) portal (https://cellstrainer.broadinstitute.org), where users can upload cell line genomic data and measure the strain’s genetic distance from a reference.

 We conclude that cancer cell lines remain a powerful tool for cancer research, but the high degree of variation across cell line strains must be considered in experimental design and data interpretation.

 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q56550183)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q56550183)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q56550183/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q56550183&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-018-0409-3)  
