
AgBioData consortium recommendations for sustainable genomics and genetics databases for agriculture
====================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q56655129]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2018  

# Highlights

AgBioData (https://www.agbiodata.org) is a consortiumof people working at agricultural biological databases, data archives and knowledgbaseswho strive to identify common issues in database development, curation and manage-ment, with the goal of creating database products that are more Findable, Accessible,Interoperable and Reusable

 Data are the lifeblood of research,and their value often do not end with the original study,as they can be reused for further investigation if properlyhandled.

 To describe agricultural-related databases, we use theterm ‘GGB (genomic, genetic and breeding) database’. GGBdatabases include any online resource that holds genomic,genetic, phenotypic and/or breeding-related informationand that is organized via a database schema, and containedwithin a database management system (or DBMS, which isa computer application that manages and provides accessto one or more types of database systems, including rela-tional, Resource Description Framework (RDF), or nonre-lational (noSQL) storage systems)

 Member databases and resources arelisted athttps://www.agbiodata.org/databasesandhttps://fairsharing.org/collection/AgBioData.

Manual biocuration is the process of an expert readingone or several related publications, assessing and/or val-idating the quality of the data and entering data manu-ally into a database using curation tools, or by providingspreadsheets to the database manager.

. Despite the fact that the actual cost of datacuration is estimated to be less than 0.1% of the cost ofthe research that generated primary data (14), data curationremains underfunded (15,16).

Community curation is still in its infancy.Meeting the increasedneed for biocuration will require engagement by the sci-entific community, however, to date, community curationhas not been widely embraced by data generators. Dataentry tools where they exist, may be difficult to learn, andgraduate students and postdocs may have little motivationor time to curate.

Provide post-graduate training in biocuration.Biocura-tors need both computation skills and biological exper-tise. We strongly encourage development of programsfor biocurators and the training of graduate students inbiocuration

ack of funding and resources to train and pay biocurators.Whilemost databases recognize the importance of using ontolo-gies for efficient data integration and retrieval, GGBdatabases typically lack sufficient funding to train andpay additional biocurators. The curation work could besomewhat eased by tools for the curation and validation ofannotations and by standardized data formats for ontologyannotation data exchange. Significant work has been donein these areas. The curation tools for GO annotationinclude TAIR’s in-house curation tool PubSearch (35)andTAIR’s community portal the Online Annotation Submis-sion Tool (TOAST) (18), PomBase’s Canto (36), the GOconsortium’s   Noctua   (http://noctua.berkeleybop.org)

ack of funding and resources to train and pay biocurators.Whilemost databases recognize the importance of using ontolo-gies for efficient data integration and retrieval, GGBdatabases typically lack sufficient funding to train andpay additional biocurators. The curation work could besomewhat eased by tools for the curation and validation ofannotations and by standardized data formats for ontologyannotation data exchange. Significant work has been donein these areas. The curation tools for GO annotationinclude TAIR’s in-house curation tool PubSearch (35)andTAIR’s community portal the Online Annotation Submis-sion Tool (TOAST) (18), PomBase’s Canto (36), the GOconsortium’s   Noctua   (http://noctua.berkeleybop.org


ecommendations for platform interoperability.Employ ontologiesand CVs and use them to annotate as much data as possi-ble.Where community-derived CVs are not available, werecommend reaching out to others before creating customvocabularies. When custom vocabularies are needed, it isbest to design them with the intent to either submit them forinclusion in an existing vocabulary or make them publiclyavailable.

All the AgBioData databases should develop sustainabilityplansthrough detailed strategic planning that activelyincludes stakeholders and funding agencies.

A little time invested nowin working together and applying common standards cansave a lot of time later and prevent duplicated efforts in thedevelopment of tools and resources.


# Comments

Nice set of tools and recommendations!


## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q56655129)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q56655129)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q56655129/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q56655129&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/DATABASE/BAY088)  
