
CellMarker: a manually curated resource of cell markers in human and mouse
==========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q56984510]  

# Highlights

One of the most fundamental questions in biol- ogy is what types of cells form different tissues and organs in a functionally coordinated fashion.

Here, we developed the CellMarker database (http://biocc.hrbmu.edu.cn/CellMarker/ or http://bio- bigdata.hrbmu.edu.cn/CellMarker/), aiming to pro- vide a comprehensive and accurate resource of cell markers for various cell types in tissues of human and mouse

At last, 13 605 cell markers of 467 cell types in 158 human tissues/sub- tissues and 9148 cell makers of 389 cell types in 81 mouse tissues/sub-tissues were collected and de- posited in CellMarker.

--> Seemingly difference by species

The cell landscapes for various organisms, such as human cell atlas, are gradually being dis- closed, accompanied by generation of myriad cell markers for distinct cell types (10,11).

However, there is no database available for cell markers identified by single- cell RNA sequencing and experimental studies. The large amount of cell markers from single-cell sequencing and ex- perimental researches are scattered over thousands of publications.

The current version of CellMarker includes more than 13 605 manually curated cell markers in human, in- volving 467 cell types and 158 tissues/sub-tissues, and 9148 markers in 389 cell types from 81 tissues/sub-tissues in mouse

to obtain cell markers that have been confirmed by flow cytometry, immunostaining, or experimen- tal studies, we searched PubMed by keywords such as ‘cell marker(s)’, ‘cellular marker(s)’, ‘surface marker(s)’, ‘cell specific marker(s)’, ‘cell signature(s)’, ‘cellular signature(s)’, ‘surface signature(s)’ and ‘cell specific signature(s)’

There are thirty biological researchers par- ticipating in reviewing the full texts of all the papers, with each paper being scrutinized by two or more researchers. Also, we collected cell markers by handbooks or instruc- tion of website from 8 companies (BIO-Rad, Labome, BD biosciences, R&D Systems, BioLegend, abcam, Miltenyi Biotec and Thermo Fisher Scientific).

To ensure the unification oftissues and cells curated from
the publications, we normalized the names of tissues into the standard tissue list from UniProt (19) and cell names into an integrated reference list based on the Human Cell Atlas (11), CELLPEDIA (20), the list of distinct cell types fromWikipedia and relevant review papers.

--> Gosh, why not using unique identifiers? Also, no cell ontology ?!

nally, the cell markers and all the related information
were loaded intoMySQL. Figure 1 schematically illustrates the general workflow and features of the resource


DATA ACCESS The CellMarker website is available online at http://biocc.hrbmu.edu.cn/CellMarker

--> 404

http://bio-bigdata.hrbmu.edu.cn/CellMarker/

--> Nice user interface. Markers in http://bio-bigdata.hrbmu.edu.cn/CellMarker/download/Human_cell_markers.txt . Table has to be cleaned. Gene IDs enable higher precision. Cell Ontology IDs could be used. This is definitely the next target for Wikidata integration.


CellMarker contains a map of a total of 13 605 and 9148 cell markers in human and mouse, respectively

--> More than PanglaoDB.

T cell is the cell with the most amount of entries (with 317 cell markers from98 entries) and the top 5 most frequently used cell markers of T cell are CD4, CD3, CD25, CD45RA and CD8 (Figure 2G).

Users can browse cell markers by clicking cell types in different tissues ofhuman (or mouse), and the complete list ofmatched cell marker entries can be returned.

CellMarker builds a uniform anno- tation for names of cell markers with a variety of formats in the original publications and organizes cell and tissue types into hierarchical structures

--> Already very good. A 3 star + resource (use of unique identifiers)

In summary, CellMaker will be an informative and valu-
able resource for researchers to identify cell types ofinterest and further analyze specific biological functions for indi- vidual cells in the single-cell RNA sequencing studies.
# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q56984510)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q56984510)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q56984510/P921%3BP4510)  
