
Trusty URIs: Verifiable, Immutable, and Permanent Digital Artifacts for Linked Data
===================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q56915510]  

# Highlights

To make digital resources on the web verifiable, immutable, and permanent, we propose a technique to include cryptographic hash values in URIs. We call them trusty URIs and we show how they can be used for approaches like nanopublications to make not only specific resources but their entire reference trees verifiable. Digital artifacts can be identified not only on the byte level but on more abstract levels such as RDF graphs, which means that resources keep their hash values even when presented in a different format. Our approach sticks to the core principles of the web, namely openness and decentralized architecture, is fully compatible with existing standards and protocols, and can therefore be used right away. Evaluation of our reference implementations shows that these desired properties are indeed accomplished by our approach, and that it remains practical even for very large file

Our method does not apply to all URIs, of course, but only to those that are meant to represent a specific and immutable digital artifact.

Published nanopublications are supposed to be immutable, but the current web has no mechanism to enforce this: It is well-known that even artifacts that are supposed to be immutable tend to change over time, while often keeping the same URI reference.

nano-publications contain self-references in the form of their own identifying URIs. The calculation of a trusty URI must therefore allow for the resulting URI to be part of the digital artifact it is calculated on (this might sound impossible at first, but we show below how it can be achieved).

4. The complete approach should be decentralized and open: Everybody should be allowed to make verifiable URIs without a central authority.
5. The approach should be based on current established standards and be com- patible with current tools and formats, so that it can be used right away.

The main benefits of artifacts with a trusty URI are that they are (1) verifiable, (2) immutable, and (3) permanent.

any artifact that is available on the web for a sufficiently long time will remain available forever. If an artifact is no longer available in its original location (e.g. the one its URI resolves to), one can still retrieve it from the cache of search engines or web archives. The

To calculate hash values on content that is more abstract than just a fixed
sequence of bytes, common approaches require the normalization (also called canonicalization) of the respective data structures such as RDF graphs.

Bio2RDF (bio2rdf.org) is an open-source project focused on the provision of linked data for the life sciences [6,4]. Bio2RDF scripts convert heterogeneously formatted data (e.g. flat files, tab-delimited files, dataset-specific formats, SQL, and XML) into a common format

Over 1 billion triples for 19 resources were made available in the second coordinated release of Bio2RDF [6], and mappings to the Seman- ticscience Integrated Ontology [7] have been established.



# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q56915510)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q56915510)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q56915510/P921%3BP4510)  
