Single-cell transcriptomics of 20 mouse organs creates a Tabula Muris
=====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57039955]  
  
Publication date : 01 of October, 2018  

# Highlights
Here we present a compendium of single-cell transcriptomic data from the model organism Mus musculus that comprises more than 100,000 cells from 20 organs and tissues.

To define cell types, we analysed each organ independently by performing
principal component analysis (PCA) on the most variable genes between
cells, followed by nearest-neighbour graph-based clustering. We then
used cluster-specific gene expression of known markers and genes
that are differentially expressed between clusters to assign cell-type
annotations to each cluster (Extended Data Figs. 1, 2, Supplementary
Table 1)

Cell type descriptions and defining genes for each organ are available in
the Supplementary Information. For each cluster, we provide annotations in the controlled vocabulary of the cell ontology19 to facilitate interexperiment comparisons. Many of these cell types have not previously
been obtained in pure populations, and our data provide a wealth of
new information on their characteristic gene-expression profiles.


In addition to these heterogeneous groups, the clustering reveals
small populations of potentially mislabelled cells inside homogenous
populations. For example, ten thymus cells in cluster 3 (composed
of 2,379 cells) are annotated as ‘leukocytes’, but they express Pecam1,
which is an endothelial marker. This is a predictable artefact of the
annotation scheme: because entire clusters, rather than individual
cells, were annotated in each organ, a sufficiently rare cell type that was
algorithmically grouped with a more populous cell type will be misannotated. 

Fig. 5 | Transcription factor analysis. a, Dendrogram of cell types
constructed with only transcription factors

he number and type of FACS cells that compose
each organ. a, Cells for each organ visualized with t-SNE, coloured by cell
type. Cell types were determined by differential gene expression of known
markers between clusters. b, Bar plots quantifying the number of each
annotated cell type. Cell type colours match their respective t-SNE plot.

--> Nice list of cell types
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q57039955)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q57039955)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q57039955/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q57039955&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-018-0590-4)  
