
Knowledge-based biomedical Data Science
=======================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57001498]  

# Highlights
Big Data to Knowledge (BD2K).” The main emphasis of the more than $200M allocated to that program has been on “Big Data;” the “Knowledge” component has largely been the implicit assumption that the work will lead to new biomedical knowledge.

 Knowledge-based biomedical Data Science involves the design and implementation of computer systems that act as if they knew about biomedicine.

 After a brief survey of existing approaches to knowledge-based data science, this position paper argues that such research is ripe for expansion, and expanded application.

 The focus of the Semantic Web standards is to make it possible to link web elements with shared meaning, and is sometimes described as the Linked Data paradigm.

 Deductive reasoning is the classic form of logical inference, it is, in general, computationally intractable.

 Despite the rapid growth of databases with ontological annotation, the main and by far the largest repository of biomedical knowledge remains the published literature.

 Perhaps the oldest method of computing with knowledge is Bayesian inference [21].

 Although it remains aspirational, the synthesis of computational simulation with knowledge-based generation and refinement of hypotheses has received substantial interest from funding agencies.

 Another im- portant understudied question is how to represent what is not known: any scientist can describe gaps, ambiguities and uncertainties in existing knowledge, yet there are few computational methods capable of representing, let alone reasoning about, such ignorance.

 Is it possible for computational systems to generate significant and novel mechanistic and pathomechanistic hypotheses about open questions in biomedicine? It is positive answers to questions like these that will drive knowledge-based data science into the mainstream of biomedical research.

 
# Comments
