
Semantic systems biology
========================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57002913]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2011  

# Highlights
The  vast  amounts  of  knowledge  in  the  biomedical  domain  have  paved  the  way  for  a  new  paradigm  in  biological  research  called  Systems   Biology, 

With our initiative, named Semantic Systems Biology (SSB),  we  augment  the  systems  biology  approach  with  semantic  web  technologies  to  enable  smooth  data  integration,  rigorous  knowledge   representation,   efficient   querying,   and   hypothesis   generation.

We  have  previously  introduced  a  new  paradigm,  the  Semantic  Systems  Biology  (SSB)  approach  [9,  10],  which  aims  at  putting  SW  technologies  in  service  of  SB. 

The  BioGateway  KB  serves  as  a  window  to  distributed,  generic  resources. Currently, BioGateway contains about 1.8 billion RDF statements   and   integrates   the   entire   set   of   OBO   Foundry   ontologies.

  CCO  is  a  knowledge  management  system  that  facilitates  the  analysis  of  the  cell  cycle  process  and  was  developed to serve the needs of anybody interested in this field of research,  be  it  a  molecular  biologist,  a  cancer  investigator  or  a  studen

  Despite   the   fact   that   currently   many   tools   and   resources   supporting  these  new  technologies  are  available  [6,  7],  a  full  implementation  of  the  Semantic  Web  is  still  out  of  reach.  Many  factors confirm this undesired situation: 
  • the considerable upfront time investment, 
  • the limitations of triple stores, 
  • poor or simply non-existing visual user interfaces. 

  --> Good point. Still the case. Also a good argument towards why  Wikidata is a game changer1.2.4. Wikidata and Knowledge Graphs

# Comments

## Tags


3.9 Semantic Systems and Synthetic Biology

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q57002913)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q57002913)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q57002913/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q57002913&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
