
An interactive system for finding complementary literatures: a stimulus to scientific discovery
===============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57372877]  

# Highlights

From downloaded titles the software constructs input for additional database
searches and produces a series of heuristic aids that help the user select a second set of articles
complementary to the first set and from a different area of research. The two sets are complementary if together they can reveal new useful information that cannot be inferred from either set
alone

To detect literature
pairs that are mutually isolated, we examine the citation pattern [7]. If two literatures are
“noninteractive’‘-that is, if they have never (or seldom) been cited together, and if
neither cites the other-then it is possible that scientists have not previously considered
both literatures together [25,35]. The two conditions, complementarity and noninteraction, describe a model structure that shows how useful information can remain undiscovered even though its components consist of public knowledge. Fig. 1 illustrates how
multiple intermediate literatures might link a given A and C


The concept of “undiscovered public knowledge” was developed and exemplified in
1986 [28,29] based on an actual structure in the biomedical literature similar to the
AB-BC model 

A second example of complementary noninteractive literatures began with the
literature on migraine (C), and subsequently identified a literature showing that magnesium deficiency (A) led to certain physiological effects (B). Since 1988 [31], more than 12
different groups of medical researchers have reported a systemic or local magnesium
deficiency in migraine or a favorable response of migraine patients to dietary supplementation with magnesium [21,37]. There is also one recent report of negative results
[Xi]. 

In this paper we
describe and evaluate the experimental computer software, which we call ARROWSMITH, and we explain how it functions within the system. 

ARROWSMITH (and its user> may be seen as a problem generating system 116,171.
The user chooses a relatively broad initial problem area (e.g. a disease for which neither 

Fig. 2. A schematic diagram of title word pathways that, proceeding from right to left, lead from a source
literature C through intermediate title words (B-terms) or literatures, to one or more title words that can
represent promising target literatures, Ai (i = I. 2,. ). A ranking algorithm for each Ai, based on the total
number of B-pathways that lead to it, is illustrated. The rank numbers (number of paths) are shown in the
leftmost colum

--> A fairly simple literature recommendation system based in more than just "similarity". Super cool. 

Procedure II should always be preceded by a database search for all records that
contain both A and C (not restricting the search to just titles), in order to identify any
A-C or A-B-C relationships that are already explicitly published. Such known
B-linkages should be investigated in advance of executing Procedure II to avoid
unknowingly rediscovering them as indirect linkages; Procedure II can then focus on
relationships that are either novel or at least cannot be found by conventional searching. 

Understanding strategies used in conventional searching is important at this point;
finding the “direct” literature is not always straightforward [ 12,131. The citation
interaction pattern also can play a key role in determining whether an A-C relationship
exists and is already known, a process described in more detail elsewhere [35]. 

The success of ARROWSMITH in the above two case studies was not matched in the
third study, that of somatomedin C and arginine [33]. This attempt failed because there
were no paired titles that were suggestive of complementary arguments within the
corresponding literatures. This failure to re-discover an already known structure underscores an important point. We cannot and do not claim that the procedures we have
developed will always be successful, even in the hands of a prescient user. Some of the
many reasons why our procedures, as presently designed, might fail to reveal complementary literatures that do exist are discussed in Section 5.2. 


ARROWSMITH possesses no algorithm for recognizing “interesting” relationships
such as transitivity or complementarity, but it seems to have such a capability. The
density of interesting title relationships revealed by the stage (iii) display appears to be
remarkably greater than the density of interesting relationships among titles selected
randomly even from two complementary literatures. The consequent impression of
intelligence arises primarily from three sources: the stoplist, the search strategy restriction category, and the organization of the output display. These structures are human
created, then supplied to the computer, and can be thought of as implanted intelligence.
ARROWSMITH filters and organizes title data based on these implanted structures. 

--> Nice considerations!! "Implanted intelligence" is a concept very useful for knowledge graphs


Significant advances beyond the capabilities of existing database search systems
might follow from fundamental improvements in the indexing of relationships. Existing
index languages and subject heading systems (such as MeSH) reflect context independent language structures, particularly synonymous and hierarchical relationships. These
systems are not designed or intended to represent adequately the relationships between
different subject headings that are appropriate for a particular article to which the
headings are applied (hence are context dependent) but not appropriate for all articles
and contexts. For example, an article discussing arteriosclerosis as a possible cause of
hypertension would be indexed under the subject headings “arteriosclerosis” and
“hypertension”; there is no provision for linking the two terms together, in the process
of indexing a given article, to show that a cause effect relationship between them is
discussed in that article. The hierarchical relationship between “arteriosclerosis” and
“coronary disease”, on the other hand, is valid in all contexts and hence is built into the
MeSH structure itself. The requirement for improved indexing of context dependent
relationships calls attention to these relationships themselves as entities that merit more
systematic study [9,101, and has led to important research on interactive frame based or
knowledge based indexing [9,10,14,15]. 

--> 1.1.3

ARROWSMITH, operating in an environment characterized by the unruly problems
of natural language text and the immensity of the scientific record, is a practical system
that seeks immediate results in furthering the aims of biomedical research. At the same
time, it is a research tool for studying undesigned but human created structures in the
literature of science. Each use of the system creates numerous examples of word linked
titles suggestive of complementarity that are of potential value in examining the logic of
scientific discourse, in new approaches to the indexing of relationships [
  
# Comments

## Tags
1.1.1
3.2
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q57372877)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q57372877)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q57372877/P921%3BP4510)  
