
The Place of Literature-Based Discovery in Contemporary Scientific Practice
===========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57372549]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2008  

# Highlights

Abstract In this brief essay, we consider some of the lessons that we learned from
our experience working with the Arrowsmith consortium that may have implications
for the field of literature-based discovery (LBD) as a whole.

For the past 5 years, the Arrowsmith consortium has developed a suite of webbased informatics tools to assist biomedical investigators in making discoveries and
establishing collaborations. 

 The Arrowsmith consortium has focused primarily on the “two-node”
search, in which a scientist wishes to find or assess links that connect two different
sets of articles (again, generally disjoint and in different disciplines) [4, 18]

If much of the research in “text mining”
seeks to identify relationships that are explicitly stated, then LBD goes further to
identify relationships that are implicitly stated – and not within a single document,
but across multiple documents.

Within the community of LBD tool developers, perhaps the biggest stumbling-block
to progress has been the lack of an adequate corpus of validated searches that can be
utilized as gold standards. Among one-node searches, only two examples have been
employed by other groups as gold standards: the Swanson studies of magnesium and
migraine [32] and fish oil and Raynaud’s phenomenon [33]

n. The relevant measure is COMPLEMENTARITY, rather than SIMILARITY, since a particular item or concept may
link two literatures meaningfully even if it is not prominent in either literature.

If jazz is a sophisticated, intricate form of expression appreciated by the cognescenti,
then LBD may be the jazz of informatics. However, jazz enthusiasts probably do
not care whether the music they listen to is popular or not, whereas LBD tools
were designed for working scientists and our shared goal is to make them both
useful and easy to use. Our experiences with the Arrowsmith two-node search have
suggested lessons that, we believe, should apply generally to other LBD projects.
Most importantly, in LBD, as in jazz, we will best succeed when our different voices
and instruments harmonize together.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q57372549)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q57372549)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q57372549&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-68690-3_2)  
