
The wisdom hierarchy: representations of the DIKW hierarchy
===========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57310096]  
  
Publication date : 15 of February, 2007  

# Highlights
The hierarchy referred to variously as the ‘Knowledge Hierarchy’, the ‘Information Hierarchy’ and the ‘Knowledge Pyramid’ is one of the fundamental, widely recognized and ‘taken-for-granted’ models in the information and knowledge literatures.

 After revisiting Ackoff’s original articulation of the hierarchy, definitions of data, information, knowledge and wisdom as articulated in recent textbooks in information systems and knowledge management are reviewed and assessed, in pursuit of a consensus on definitions and transformation processes. 

 Typically information is defined in terms of data, knowledge in terms of information, and wisdom in terms of knowledge, but there is less consensus in the description of the processes that transform elements lower in the hierarchy into those above them, leading to a lack of definitional clarity. In addition, there is limited reference to wisdom in these texts.


The implicit assumption is that data can be used to create
information; information can be used to create knowledge, and knowledge can be used to create
wisdom. 

Wisdom is identified as the pinnacle of the hierarchy.
• One of our objectives in revisiting the DIKW hierarchy is to further illuminate the notion of ‘wisdom’.

The theoretical and philosophical discussion
has two major branches: information philosophy, focusing on the nature of information; and knowledge management, which contributes to notions of knowledge.

Plato [27] first
defined knowledge as ‘justified true belief’ and this concept has been debated over the centuries by
Aristotle [28], Descartes [29], Kant [30], Polanyi [31] and others

. Kakabadse et al. [19] propose five different knowledge management perspectives each of which takes a different stance on the nature of knowledge and
knowledge processes: philosophy-based, cognitive, network, community, and quantum.

Floridi suggests that ‘Of our mundane and technical concepts information
is currently one of the most important, most widely used and least understood.’ [6, p. 459] He identifies six approaches to the definition of information, respectively: the communication theory approach,
the probabilistic approach, the modal approach, the systemic approach, the inferential approach, and
the semantic approach.

Many authors agree that the first appearance of the hierarchy was in T.S. Eliot’s poem The Rock in
1934 [32]. This poem contains the following lines:
Where is the wisdom that we have lost in knowledge?
Where is the knowledge that we have lost in information?

Ackoff offers the following definitions of data, information, knowledge and wisdom, and their
associated transformation processes:

• Data are defined as symbols that represent properties of objects, events and their environment.
They are the products of observation. But are of no use until they are in a useable (i.e. relevant)
form. The difference between data and information is functional, not structural.

• Information is contained in descriptions, answers to questions that begin with such words as
who, what, when and how many. Information systems generate, store, retrieve and process data.
Information is inferred from data.

• Knowledge is know-how, and is what makes possible the transformation of information into
instructions. Knowledge can be obtained either by transmission from another who has it, by
instruction, or by extracting it from experience.

--> Interesting, I called knowledge a different thing in my framework

• Intelligence is the ability to increase efficiency.

• Wisdom is the ability to increase effectiveness. Wisdom adds value, which requires the mental
function that we call judgement. The ethical and aesthetic values that this implies are inherent
to the actor and are unique and personal.


Information systems books tend to focus on the relationship between data and information, often
defining information in terms of data. The concepts of format, structure, organization, meaning and
value feature in the various definitions.

• ‘Knowledge is an intrinsically ambiguous and equivocal term’ [49, p. 3].

--> Well, as like any term

• ‘Knowledge is information combined with understanding and capability; it lives in the minds of
people’ [43, p. 2].

• ‘Knowledge exists along a continuum between tacit knowledge (know how) and explicit knowledge (know what)’ [39, p. 17].

In the knowledge management literature, Awad and Ghaziri suggest that ‘Wisdom is the highest level of abstraction, with vision foresight and the ability to see beyond the horizon’ [20, p. 40]. Jashapara raises the matter of ethics:
‘Wisdom is the ability to act critically or practically in any given situation. It is based on ethical
judgement related to an individual’s belief system’ [39, pp. 17–18].
This relatively limited discussion of the concept of wisdom in these texts is indicative of the limited attention to discussions of the nature of wisdom and how it can be cultivated in the wider information systems, knowledge management and management literature

Transaction Processing Systems
Data

Management Information Systems
Information

Decision Support Systems
Knowledge

Expert Systems
Wisdom
Fig. 7. The wisdom hierarchy mapping to types of information systems.


# Comments

Many different systems! Interesting, I guess I could play this game too.

I absolutely have to read this carefully someday


## Tags
- 1.1.4. Data, Information, Knowledge, Wisdom
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q57310096)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q57310096)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q57310096&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1177/0165551506070706)  
