
Lung Single-Cell Signaling Interaction Map Reveals Basophil Role in Macrophage Imprinting
=========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57489977]  
  
Publication date : 11 of October, 2018  

# Highlights

. Using single-cell RNA sequencing (RNA-seq), we characterize the cellular composition of the lung during development and identify vast dynamics in cell composition and their molecular characteristics. Analyzing 818 ligand-receptor interaction pairs within and between cell lineages, we identify broadly interacting cells, including AT2, innate lymphocytes (ILCs), and basophils.

<!-- Good example for   - 3.10. Minimal Information About New Cell Classes -->

The mammalian lung is the central respiratory organ, featuring a diverse set of specialized cell types. Gas exchange in the lung occurs in the alveoli, which are composed of specialized epithelial cells: the alveolar type (AT) 1 cells that mediate gas exchange, and AT2 cells that secrete surfactant and maintain the surface tension of the lungs 

Alveolar epithelial cells branch from their mutual progenitor between the canalicular (E16.5) and saccular (E18.5) stages, resulting in changes in morphology and gene expression (Treutlein et al., 2014).

We collected cells from major embryonic developmental stages: early morphogenesis (E12.5), the canalicular stage (E16.5), and the saccular stage (E18.5–E19.5; Late E). We further collected cells from postnatal stages of alveolarization immediately after birth (1, 6, 7, and 10 hr postnatal; Early PN), 

In accordance to previous works (Kopf et al., 2015, Tan and Krasnow, 2016), we identified three distinct macrophage subsets, which we term macrophage I–III. These subsets appeared in waves during development, with macrophage I dominating in early pregnancy, macrophage II culminating around birth, and macrophage III steadily increasing since late pregnancy stage, and becoming the majority on day 7 PN

Surprisingly, basophils, comprising a rare population of the immune compartment (1.5%), displayed a rich and complex LR profile, interacting with both the immune and the non-immune compartments.


we implemented a Mcpt8YFP/+ transgenic mouse model and observed that YFP+ basophils within the lung parenchyma were localized in close proximity to alveoli at 30 hr PN, on day 8.5 PN, and in 8-week-old mice.

Lung basophils form a complex signaling network through their exclusive ligands, such as Il6 and Hgf (Ohmichi et al., 1998), by communicating with receptors expressed by a vast range of cell types. 



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q57489977)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q57489977)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q57489977&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2018.09.009)  
