
A Survey and Classification of Controlled Natural Languages
===========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57402167]  

# Highlights

What is here called controlled natural language (CNL) has traditionally been given many different names. Especially during the last four decades, a wide variety of such languages have been designed. They are applied to improve communication among humans, to improve translation, or to provide natural and intuitive representations for formal notations. Despite the apparent differences, it seems sensible to put all these languages under the same umbrella.

The goal of this article is to provide a common terminology and a common model for CNL, to contribute to the understanding of their general nature, to provide a starting point for researchers interested in the area, and to help developers to make design decisions.

Generally, this work has several, partly overlapping, goals, ranging from purely theoretical to more practical objectives (listed in this order):
- To give us a better understanding of the nature of CNL 
- To establish a common terminology and a common model for CNL 
- To provide a starting point for researchers interested in CNL 
- To help CNL developers make design decisions


A controlled language (CL) is a restricted version of a natural language which has been engineered to meet a special purpose, most often that of writing technical documentation for non-native speakers of the document language. A typical CL uses a well-defined subset of a language’s grammar and lexicon, but adds the terminology needed in a technical domain. (Kittredge 2003, page 441)

Controlled natural language is a subset of natural language that can be accurately and efficiently processed by a computer, but is expressive enough to allow natural usage by non-specialists. (Fuchs and Schwitter 1995, page 1)

They agree, however, on the fact that a CNL is based on a certain natural language but is more restrictive. It is also generally agreed that CNLs are constructed languages, which means languages that did not emerge naturally but have been engineered.

Definition 2 (short): A controlled natural language is a constructed language that is based on a certain natural language, being more restrictive concerning lexicon, syntax, and/or semantics, while preserving most of its natural properties.

The rules that define a CNL can be proscriptive or prescriptive (Nyberg, Mitamura,
and Huijsen 2003), or a combination of the two. Proscriptive rules describe what is not allowed, whereas prescriptive rules describe what is allowed.

3.4 Simplicity
The fourth dimension is a measure of the simplicity or complexity of an exact and comprehensive language description covering syntax and semantics, if such a com- plete description is possible at all. This description should not presuppose intuitive knowledge about any natural language. It is therefore not primarily a measure for the effort needed by a human to learn the language,



“Sowa’s syllogisms” (Sowa 2000b) are simple logic languages based on the syllogisms originally introduced by Aristotle (ca. 350 BC). Sowa was probably the first to bring them into the context of CNL, claiming that they are the first reported instance of a controlled natural language.

Many variations exist that use larger word sets. The Simple English version of Wikipedia,3 for example, claims to use Basic English, but in fact uses a much less restricted language


Caterpillar Fundamental English (CFE) (Verbeke 1973) was an influential controlled language developed at Caterpillar. It was officially introduced in 1971, was based on Basic English (Smart 2003), and has been reported to be the earliest industry-based CNL (Wojcik and Hoard 1997). The need for a controlled language emerged because of the increasing sophistication of Caterpillar’s products and the need to communicate with non-English speaking service personnel in different countries

I would like to conclude with the observation that the study of controlled languages
is a very dynamic and highly interdisciplinary field, for the most part occupying small niches in the academic, industrial, and governmental worlds. However, adding all these niches together gives us a large body of past and ongoing work. Assuming that people will have to interact even more closely with computers and across language borders in the future, I am convinced that we will see even more work in this area


--> Controlled Natural Language for NL definition of types:

Less imprecise languages (P2). For these languages, the degree of ambiguity and vague- ness is considerably lower than in natural languages, and their interpretation depends much less on context. They restrict the use and/or the meaning of a wide range of the respective ambiguous, vague, or context-dependent constructs. However, these con- structs are still too dominant to make automatic interpretation reliable. Such languages are typically not related to a formal (i.e., mathematically precise) underpinning

Languages with high expressiveness (E4+). Such languages have all listed features (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e), but are not E5-languages: They have second-order universal quantification over concepts and relations, in addition to the features of E3. Second-order predicate calculus belongs to this category

Languages with natural texts (N5). With these languages, complete texts and documents can be written in a natural style, with a natural text flow, and with natural semantics. In the case of spoken languages, complete dialogs can be produced with a natural flow and a natural combination of speech acts

Very complex languages (S1). These languages have the complexity of natural languages. They cannot be described in an exact and comprehensive manner.


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q57402167)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q57402167)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q57402167/P921%3BP4510)  
