
Gene expression variability across cells and species shapes innate immunity
===========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57793623]  
  
Publication date : 24 of October, 2018  

# Highlights
. Using bulk and single-cell transcriptomics in fibroblasts and mononuclear phagocytes from different species, challenged with immune stimuli, we map the architecture of the innate immune response. Transcriptionally diverging genes, including those that encode cytokines and chemokines, vary across cells and have distinct promoter structures. Conversely, genes that are involved in the regulation of this response, such as those that encode transcription factors and kinases, are conserved between species and display low cell-to-cell variability in expression.

Here, we study the evolution of this programme using two cells types—fibroblasts and mononuclear phagocytes—in different mammalian clades challenged with several immune stimuli (Fig. 1a).

<!-- I remember reading this article! Super cool -->

We then used the human H3K4me3 ChIP–seq peaks to define active promoter regions of the responsive genes in human fibroblasts

We compared the rate at which genes evolved in their coding sequences with their response divergence by considering the ratio of non-synonymous (dN) to synonymous (dS) nucleotide substitutions. Genes that evolved rapidly in transcriptional response had higher coding sequence divergence (higher dN/dS values) than dsRNA-responsive genes with low response divergence (Fig. 4a).

Here, we have charted the evolutionary architecture of the innate immune response. We show that genes that diverge rapidly between species show higher levels of variability in their expression across individual cells than genes that diverge more slowly.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q57793623)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q57793623)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q57793623&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-018-0657-2)  
