
Discovering pathway and cell-type signatures in transcriptomic compendia with machine learning
==============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57897434]  
  
Publication date : 20 of September, 2018  

# Highlights

3. Unsupervised machine learning to discover hidden expression states
227 Unsupervised machine learning identifies underlying structure in data without the need
228 for sample labels (50). The goals of unsupervised learning include clustering samples into
229 similar groups and identifying hidden, or latent, variables present in lower dimensional
230 subspaces. Applied to gene expression data, unsupervised learning has been used to identify
231 disease subtypes (11), deconvolve cell-types (33), and extract underlying gene expression
232 modules present in various percentages in lower dimensional data representations (51). In the
233 following subsection, we 1) broadly introduce unsupervised learning methodology, 2) discuss
234 the extraction of cell-types from expression data in an unsupervised manner

(56). However, we will not focus on clustering applications and instead focus on
280 compression algorithms applied to uncover cell-type and pathway signatures. 


). The NMF core algorithm can be guided
289 to identify cell-types by restricting the component matrix columns to sum to 1 (60).
290 Additionally, a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approach has been proposed to estimate
291 cell-type proportions in an unsupervised fashion (61).


# Comments

Interesting review, would have been useful when I was entering the field.

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q57897434)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q57897434)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q57897434/P921%3BP4510)  
