
Neuronal heterogeneity and stereotyped connectivity in the auditory afferent system
===================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q57816640]  
  
Publication date : 12 of September, 2018  

# Highlights
 Using single-cell RNA sequencing, we identify four types of SG neurons, including three novel subclasses of type I neurons and the type II neurons, and provide a comprehensive genetic framework that define their potential synaptic communication patterns. 

The connectivity patterns of the three subclasses of type I neurons with inner hair cells and their electrophysiological profiles suggest that they represent the intensity-coding properties of auditory afferents.

Processing of the sound signal in the auditory nerve has been hypothesized to originate in the diversity of biophysical properties of type I SG neuron fibers (95% of auditory afferents). 

Another example of auditory fibers diversity is the intensity driven activation of selective auditory afferents5,8,9, where at least two populations of auditory fibers can be distinguished on the basis of their threshold activity: the low threshold (LT) fibers and the high threshold (HT) fibers.

The majority of SG neurons are type I neurons; they are myelinated, contact the inner hair cells (IHCs) and are the principal carrier of the auditory signal

To identify neuron types in adult SG neurons, a total of 487 tdTomato positive (TOM+) cells from PVCre;R26TOM cochlea of postnatal stage 17 (P17), P21, and P33 were processed for single-cell transcriptome analysis (Fig. 1a–c)

We confirmed the type I identity of the three other clusters (thereafter named Ia, Ib, and Ic types) by their high expression of the transcription factor Prox114 and lack of Prph (Fig. 1e, Supplementary Fig. 1a). 

The excitability of auditory afferents is also regulated by the lateral and medial olivocochlear (LOC and MOC) efferents which innervate respectively the type I and type II peripheral endings underneath the HCs and modulate their sensitivity1,2,25. 

<!-- similar types described in https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q90761592 -->

Through GSEA of P3 SG neuron types, we observed that “neurogenesis” and “morphogenesis/neuronal projection”

In this context, future studies will be needed to also identify the dedicated output neurons and associated ascending circuits needed to process centrally the peripheral information encoded by each individual SG neuron type.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q57816640)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q57816640)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q57816640&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41467-018-06033-3)  
