
The Terminologia Histologica after 10 years: Inconsistencies, mistakes, and new proposals
=========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q58049549]  
  
Publication date : 01 of September, 2018  

# Highlights

hisarticle detailsour  experience withthe Terminologia Histologica(TH) and  its  utility in the  teachingof histology,cytology,and  clinical  medicine  (e.g., pathologyandhematology).Latin histologicalnomenclature has  been usedfor 43years,and thelatestversion of the TH has  been  in use for 15years(althoughit was only issued publicly within the past10  years).

Weclassify these changesintosixgroups: 1.) mistakes in the TH, 2.) discrepancies amongvariousTerminologiae, 3.) discrepancies within the TH,4.) the repetition  of  terms,5.) synonyms  in the TH,and 6.) missing  terms  in the TH.Surprisingly, unlike the anatomical  nomenclature,the  histological  nomenclature has  beenneglected  in theliterature. This article addresses this problem  by reviewingand summarizingthe state of thisfield, pointingout keydiscrepancies,  offeringsolutions,and highlightingtopics  forfurther discussion

Theanatomical  nomenclature  is  much olderand  datesback  to  1895,  which  waswhen the Anatomische Gesellschaft(Society of German-speaking anatomists) publishedthe first  Latin  anatomical  nomenclature.

First worldwide agreement was reached to use thisversion  in 1955 at the 6thCongress of the International  Federation  of  Associations  of  Anatomists (IFAA)
 The  7thCongress  of  IFAA  in  New  York  (1960) decided  to  create  the Nomina  Histologica,and  a  new  commissionwas  assembled:  theInternational  Anatomical  Nomenclature  Committee

 The  last  revision  of  the Latin histologicalnomenclature was performedby the Federative International Committee on  Anatomical  Terminology(FICAT)  and  approved  by  the  International  Federation  of Associationsof Anatomists (IFAA) as the only valid official Latin nomenclature forhistologyin 2003. Fiveyearslater,  it  was  issued  under  the  nameTerminologia Histologica(TH) (FIPAT, 2008). 

 here  are  4,547 termslisted  in the Terminologia Histologica(TH).With  regard  to synonyms  for  each  term,  several have  one  (cytosol;  matrix  cytoplasmica),two (limbus microvillosus; limbus penicillatus; limbus striatus),or, rarely, three (perikaryon; neurosoma; soma;  corpus  neuronis).

 lthough  the paper  versionwasissued  together  with  a  CD-ROM,  its promotion was very poor, both by Wolters Kluwer (the publisher)and IFAA.Majorchanges
 
 It  is  necessary  to  draw  attention  to  the  weak  points  of  the  Terminologia Histologicaand discussthempublicly.

 he  structure of  the THshould be changed  to  adopt the clever organizationused for theTerminologia Neuroanatomica(TNA),and Terminologia Embryologica 2(TE2)from2017
 
 The  term forthe primaryepithelial  cell  of  the  large  intestine  in the TH  is colonocytus (colonocyte).  This  term is  grammaticallyincorrect.  The  termination  oftheGreek  term “colon” is -on,and,thus,the genitive is “coli” (the word root is “col-”). The correct form of  the  term  should  be colocytus (colocyte),  similarto  thewords“coloscopy”(an endoscopic  examination)  and“colostomy” (used  for  the  artificial  opening  of  the  large intestine in the anterior abdominal wall)

 The  English  term  for epitheliocytus  tactilis (“cell  of  Merkel”)  is  different  in  the  chapter Organa   sensuum –sensory   epithelial   cell   (H3.11.06.0.00004) and   in   the   chapter Integumentum  commune–epithelial  tactile  cell  (H3.15.00.0.00004).  It  seems  reasonable to usethe  term epithelial  tactile  cellinstead.  Moreover,  the  identification  code forthe latter (H3.15.00.0.00004)is strange, and thisseems to bea typesetting mistake.

 The   most   striking   discrepancy   is   in   the   usage   of the preposition   pre-(e.g.,preterminalis)  in  Latin  terms.The  last  edition  of the TA  (approved in 1997 andpublished 1998  and  2011)  was  influenced  by  the dominance  of  theEnglish  language,and  that  is  why some Latin terms were simplified(i.e.,orthographic and grammar changes). For example,the diphthong -ae-has been reduced to the sound -e-(presternalis, pretrachealis, prevertebralis). However,  for reasons that are unclear,this conventionwas  not used  in the TH (2008)orTE (2013),but  it  is  again appliedin the Terminologia  Neuroanatomicaand TE2  (2017). This mismatch should be corrected,and the form pre-shouldbe applied.

 3.2    Discrepancies    between the Terminologia    Embryologica    and    Terminologia Histologica (see Table 2)


The adjectives penicillatus and penicillarisboth mean“having tufts of fine hairs,” andare used inthe formpenicillatus versus penicillaris:oEpitheliocytus penicillatus–brush cell (tuft cell) –in the gallbladderoEnterocyte   feature –Limbus   microvillosus;   Limbus   penicillatus;   Limbus striatus–Microvillous border; Brush border; Striated borderoRed   pulp   of   the   spleen –Arteria   penicillaris–Penicillar   artery (the “penicillate” artery was used in English before this term appearedintheTH)oArteriola penicillaris–Penicillar arteriole(ibid)oCerebellar cortex –Neuron penicillatum –unipolar brush cell(TH, TNA).

The term  for superficial cells of the gastric  mucosa  is mucocytus  superficiei.However, amore appropriate term ismucocytus superficialis, which is consistent with terms forother superficially located cells.


he  adjective “fibrosus” in the term astrocytus  fibrosus is  inappropriate.  The  cell  is  not fibrous (which means “to have many fibers”),but it  is  instead fibrillar (which  means “to have  many  fibrils”[i.e.,small  fibers]).  Thus, the  term  should  be  changed  to astrocytusfibrillosus

The    termscellula    uninucleata(H1.00.01.0.00016)    and cellula    mononucleata (H1.00.01.0.00017)  both  describe  a  cell  with  only  one  nucleus,and  they  are  obviously synonyms. Theyshould be merged into one term,cellula uninucleata, in accordance withthe  other  terms related  tothe number  of  nuclei  within acell  using the Latin prefixesbi-and multi-

--> Man that must have a reason

Morphologia  externa of  the  subchapter Cellula,we  can  add  anotherthree cell types  according  to morphology: cellula  caliciformis(goblet-shaped  cell),cellula piriformis(pear-shaped  cell)(e.g.,neuron  purkinjesein  the  cerebellum),  and cellula discoidea binconcava (biconcave disc shape)(e.g.,erythrocyte

.Asimple,clear,and understandable  nomenclature  is neededfor effectivecommunicationamongstmorphologists, clinicians, teachers, students,and translators

Finally,  a keypoint aboutterminologyand,  specifically,eponyms,  should  be made. Although they  have  not been considered official terms  in the anatomical  nomenclature since 1955 (Woederman, 1957), they are widely used  in clinical practice. Few of these termshave been  introduced  into  the  Latin  histological  nomenclature  (complexus  golgiensis,  cellula panethensis,stratum  purkinjese)

This article aimed to draw attention to severaldeficienciesin the TH.It is intended to sparkbroad  andopen  discussion amongbothspecialistsand thepublic.  Tofacilitate  this dialogue,we suggest  some tips  and proposals. However,  it  has  to  be  emphasized  that  the effortsof  all  nomenclature  commissionsacross  morphological  fields  since  the  time of the Anatomische  Gesellschaftto the FIPAT  should  be  appreciated
# Comments

## Tags
--> Terminologia Histologica - 2.4.2.3. Nomenclature

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q58049549)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q58049549)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q58049549/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q58049549&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.AANAT.2018.05.005)  
