
Expanding the horizons of microRNA bioinformatics
=================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q58161139]  
  
Publication date : 05 of June, 2018  

# Highlights
We are addressing this problem by providing two new bioinformatics datasets that contain experimentally verified functional information for mammalian microRNAs involved in cardiovascular-relevant, and other, processes. To date, our resource provides over 4,400 Gene Ontology annotations associated with over 500 miRNAs from human, mouse and rat and over 2,400 experimentally validated miRNA:target interactions.

In addition, the majority of tools or algorithms predict that most Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 7, 2018 - Published by rnajournal.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
Huntley, RP  4miRNAs will silence 100s to 1000s of genes (Kast 2011; Singh 2017; Jovanovic et al. 2010)

Here we present two new datasets: the first consisting of Gene Ontology annotations describing the experimentally proven biological roles of miRNAs, which can be used in analyses to identify processes regulated by a specific miRNA or a set of miRNAs; the second consisting of experimentally validated miRNA:target interactions, which will enable confident identification of validated miRNA targets, as well as indirect analysis of miRNA function based on the established role of mRNAs proven to be targeted by the miRNA(s)

Additionally, the major biological databases, such as Ensembl (Zerbino et al. 2017), UniProtKB (UniProt Consortium 2017), NCBI Gene (NCBI Resource Coordinators 2017), GeneCards (Stelzer et al. 2016) and even Wikipedia, display the GO annotations available for each gene or gene product.

Consequently, 73 out of the 115 papers were reviewed. Out of the 109 miRTarBase interactions that were investigated, 30 (28%) did not have sufficient supporting evidence for a direct interaction (Table 1 and Supplemental Table S1)

Although our primary focus is curating the role of miRNAs involved in cardiovascular-related processes, many of the curated miRNAs have roles in diverse developmental, metabolic and signaling processes since they can each potentially target many hundreds of genes. Therefore, the biological roles we capture are relevant to many biological areas, including early development, cancer, as well as cardiovascular disease. 


To ensure maximum utility of these annotations, the miRNA:target interaction information in the GO annotation database was extracted to provide a PSICQUIC web service-compatible dataset (“EBI-GOA-miRNA”) for use in network analysis tools such as Cytoscape

Together, these roles suggest that Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 7, 2018 - Published by rnajournal.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
Huntley, RP  19DUSP10 may have a previously unrecognized role in EMT, which is not yet reported in the experimental literature, although other DUSP family members have been associated with EMT.

At present, all human miRNA GO annotations available through miRBase (Kozomara and Griffiths-Jones 2014), Ensembl (Yates et al. 2016), NCBI Gene (Brown et al. 2015), the GO Consortium (The Gene Ontology Consortium 2017) and miRNA:target interactions available from the PSICQUIC web service (del-Toro et al. 2013) have been created by the BHF-UCL functional gene annotation initiative. 


Maximizing the use of our miRNA GO annotations is one of our key objectives. Consequently, we are in discussions with several high-profile bioinformatic resource providers to enable the inclusion of the annotations in their databases or analysis tools, including RNAcentral (The RNAcentral Consortium 2015), DAVID (Huang et al. 2008), g:Profiler (Reimand et al. 2016) and PANTHER (Mi et al. 2013). 


--> No Wikidata :(
  
)
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q58161139)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q58161139)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q58161139/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q58161139&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1261/RNA.065565.118)  
