
Genetic identification of brain cell types underlying schizophrenia
===================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q58462175]  

# Highlights

By applying knowledge of the cellular taxonomy of the brain from single-cell RNA sequencing, we evaluated whether the genomic loci implicated in schizophrenia map onto specific brain cell types.

Our results suggest a parsimonious explana- tion: the common-variant genetic results for schizophrenia point at a limited set of neurons, and the gene sets point to the same cells. The genetic risk associated with MSNs did not overlap with that of glutamatergic pyramidal cells and interneurons, sug- gesting that different cell types have biologically distinct roles in schizophrenia.

After clustering, cell-type identities were derived using known expression patterns, histology and/or molecular studies16–18 (Supplementary Table 2).

For each scRNA-seq and snRNA-seq dataset, we estimated the specificity of each gene and cell
type. This measure represents
the proportion of the total expression of a gene found in one cell type as compared to that in all cell types (i.e., the mean expression in one cell type divided by the mean expression in all cell types).

--> Well, they say "type" but they mean "cluster assigned to type"

Heat map of association P values of diverse human genome-wide association with KI level 1 mouse brain cell types using MAGMA (left) and LDSC (right). Bonferroni-significant results are marked with red borders (P < 0.05/((24 + 149) × 8)).

We found clear connec- tions to just 4 of 24 main brain cell types: MSNs, pyramidal cells in hippocampal CA1, pyramidal cells in the somatosensory cortex and cortical interneurons. Most of the strong results found in the mouse data were replicated in external mouse data and in the more-limited human datasets.

--> Really high wishful thinking for cell types to be the same across species.
--> At least they used a curated mapping from MGI for homologous genes across species

For example, genetic polymorphisms in C4A appear to be etiologically involved in schizophrenia7
, but the expression of C4A ishighest in astrocytes, vascular leptomeningeal cells and microglia. We were thus careful with our conclusions: we can implicate a cell type (for example, MSNs show positive evidence), but it is premature to exclude cell types for which we do not have data or those with dissim- ilar function or under selection pressure between mouse and human.

# Comments

Interesting mapping of cell-types to GWAS (in <https://github.com/NathanSkene/MAGMA_Celltyping>)

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q58462175)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q58462175)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q58462175/P921%3BP4510)  
