
Disease-relevant transcriptional signatures identified in individual smooth muscle cells from healthy mouse vessels
===================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q58569656]  
  
Publication date : 01 of November, 2018  

# Highlights

e detect a rare population of VSMC-lineage cells that express the multipotent
progenitor marker Sca1, progressively downregulate contractile VSMC genes and upregulate
genes associated with VSMC response to inﬂammation and growth factors. We ﬁnd that Sca1
upregulation is a hallmark of VSMCs undergoing phenotypic switching in vitro and in vivo,
and reveal an equivalent population of Sca1-positive VSMC-lineage cells in atherosclerotic
plaques

Single-cell transcriptomes of vascular smooth muscle cells. To
delineate VSMC heterogeneity in healthy tissue, we initi-
ally generated transcriptional proﬁles of individual cells using
Fluidigm C1 technology.

he scRNA-seq dataset described above (Fig. 1) comprised 79 AA and
64 DT cells

Consequences of VSMC heterogeneity in healthy vessels.
We explored the functional relevance of a rare subset of
VSMC-lineage cells that express Sca1, which is encoded by one of
the identiﬁed variably expressed genes (Ly6a/Sca1). We show that
Sca1+ VSMC lineage cells constitute a heterogeneous cell
population. Some of these cells exhibit a contractile VSMC
(cVSMC) signature, as evidenced by expression of cVSMCpos
genes. In contrast, other Sca1+ VSMC lineage cells express
reduced levels of the contractile VSMC signature and instead
manifest a “VSMC response signature” (represented by
cVSMCneg genes), including markers of synthetic VSMCs.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q58569656)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q58569656)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q58569656&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41467-018-06891-X)  
