
ECO, the Evidence & Conclusion Ontology: community standard for evidence information
====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q58587002]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2019  

# Highlights

The Evidence and Conclusion Ontology (ECO) contains terms (classes) that describe types of evidence and assertion methods. ECO terms are used in the process of biocuration to capture the evidence that supports biological assertions (e.g. gene product X has function Y as supported by evidence Z). 

Users can request new terms or changes to existing terms through the project’s GitHub site. ECO is released into the public domain under CC0 1.0 Universal.

--> Yes Yes!

The Evidence and Conclusion Ontology (ECO) provides a controlled vocabulary for the systematic capture of evidence information.

For example, a group could establish that if a function is asserted for a protein based on sequence similarity to another protein, it is required that the matching protein must itself be experimentally characterized. The GO has established such rules (6).

Since evidence comes in many flavors and its consistent storage is of such importance to effective annotation, a systematic way to organize types of evidence and apply them in annotations is essential. An ontology is the best solution to this challenge. An ontology is a controlled vocabulary of terms (or classes) related to each other in defined ways.

Currently, there are 1515 terms in ECO. Since the first ECO publication in 2014 (2), we have increased the number of terms by nearly 1000.

ECO has long supported efforts by the GO Consortium (GOC) to represent evidence in gene product annotations (3,15). 

Here, we provide an update on a previously described (2) collaboratively maintained table that maps the three-letter mnemonic GO evidence codes (e.g. “IDA" or “Inferred from Direct Assay”) to equivalent ECO classes (e.g. ECO:0000314 ‘direct assay evidence used in manual assertion’). This mapping can be found here: http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/eco/gaf-eco-mapping.txt. 

Annotating evidence with ECO affords more granularity than using GO evidence codes alone. For example, ECO:0007192 ‘motility assay evidence used in manual assertion’ is a cross product term that connotes both that human judgement was involved in making an annotation and that the evidence supporting the annotation arose from some motility assay.

Much recent ECO development has emphasized the normalizing of the ontology in order to facilitate usability and interoperability by broader resources.

To accomplish this, ECO has been harmonizing with OBI, an orthogonal ontology in the biomedical domain (11). Whereas ECO covers evidence and assertion methods, OBI provides a mechanism to clearly capture information about scientific investigations through more than 2500 terms describing objectives, assays and devices. 

As scientists in the community use ECO for their work, they find the need for new terms or for clarification of existing terms and relationships.

The OMP provides terms for the annotation of microbial phenotypes (8). The OMP curators record phenotype annotations by utilizing a wiki-based system. We have created more than 25 new evidence classes in ECO that enabled OMP curators to support annotation assertions. 

he ECO is released into the public domain under CC0 1.0 Universal (https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode). Anyone is free to copy, modify or distribute the work, even for commercial purposes, without asking permission. Ontology files are also available for download from the ECO website (http://evidenceontology.org).

Wikidata annotation for n-acetyltransferase lmo1400.

--> Nice!!

s ECO development increased to support these newer users as well as continuing to support GO, a number of small- and large-scale annotation projects and software applications began to use ECO to provide at least part of the computational framework for evidence information. Such projects included many under the auspices of our larger users, for example EBI’s Complex Portal (22) and GO’s Noctua annotation tool (5). To accommodate our ever-increasing group of users, ECO has been iteratively refined and broadened. ECO has sought user feedback the entire time by performing outreach through a number of avenues. 


A significant step toward broader adoption of ECO by our user community has been its extension beyond the borders of targeted biological databases to a large-scale open data sharing project called Wikidata (24)

Such determination methods are all ECO terms. In this case, two determination methods (evidence types) are present: ‘transcript expression evidence’ (ECO:0000009) and ‘expression microarray evidence’ (ECO:0000058). Supporting Wikidata annotations with structured data, including ECO, facilitates provenance tracking for biomedical claims, because it allows users to trace back to the original supporting evidence for a given declaration. Furthermore, any type of biomedical claim that is made can have its determination method traced and be interoperable with all the databases that use biomedical ontologies

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q58587002)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q58587002)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q58587002/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q58587002&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/NAR/GKY1036)  
