
Molecular, spatial and functional single-cell profiling of the hypothalamic preoptic region
===========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q58577965]  
  
Publication date : 01 of November, 2018  

# Highlights

:We combined scRNA-seq and multi-plexed error robust fluorescence in situ hybrid-ization (MERFISH), a single-cell transcriptomeimaging method, to investigate the molecu-lar, spatial, and functional organization of themouse hypothalamic preoptic region. 

We profiled ~1 million cells,identified ~70 neuronal populations characterized by distinct neuromodulatory signaturesand spatial organizations, and defined specific neuronal populations activated duringsocial behaviors in male and female mice, providing a high-resolution framework formechanistic investigation of behavior circuits.

edevelopedaMERFISH-basedimagingandanalysis platform for in situ cell-type identifi-cation and mapping and used this approach, incombination with scRNA-seq, to create a cellatlas of the preoptic region of the mouse hypo-thalamus

). However, on average, neuromodu-lator receptors were expressed more widely andat lower levels than neuromodulators and tran-scription factors, limiting their use as potentialmarkers for functional studies. 

Hierarchical tree analyses (29) showed thatinhibitory neuronal clusters that express a com-mon neuromodulator were often grouped togetheron the tree—for example, clusters expressing Avp,Gal, Crh, Tac1, and Sst (Fig. 1C)—

--> messy

Fig. 2. scRNA-seq identifies subdivisions of cells that express markerspreviously associated with single neuronal populations.

--> "subdivisions", another way to say the same thing

The neuropeptide galanin (Gal) has been as-sociated with behaviorally relevant cell popu-lations of the preoptic region (4,5,38) in theMPOA (parenting and feeding) (5,38)andVLPO(sleep) (4).


. Weobserved specific clusters enriched in genes pre-viously identified as markers of functionally im-portant preoptic cells (for example, cells involvedin parenting, aggression, thermoregulation, sleep,or thirst), such as Galanin, Th, Adcyap1, Nts, Crh,Tac1,Cck,Agtr1a,Nos1,andaromatase(tablesS5and S9).

Our data also resolved many of the pre-viously described singular cell types into multiplecell populations. W
# Comments
Very interesting, but perhaps too specific for me.


## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q58577965)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q58577965)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q58577965/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q58577965&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
