
Single cell molecular alterations reveal target cells and pathways of concussive brain injury
=============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q58698620]  
  
Publication date : 25 of September, 2018  

# Highlights

Using the unbiased single cell sequencing method Drop-seq, we report that concussive TBI
affects previously undefined cell populations, in addition to classical hippocampal cell types

The hippocampal formation encompasses
four Cornu Ammonis (CA) subfields largely composed of pyramidal cells, and their connections with dentate gyrus (DG) cells.

f traumatic brain injury (TBI) i

Mild TBI (mTBI) is particularly difficult to diagnose given its
broad pathology, such that there are no accepted biomarkers for
mTBI3

Which cell types are
vulnerable to mTBI at the acute phase? Within each cell type,
which genes have altered transcriptional activities that are
induced by mTBI? 

Beyond retrieving
known cell markers, we also identified novel marker genes for
each hippocampal cell type, such as Calml4 for ependymal, Vcan
for oligodendrocytes, and Ly6a for endothelial cells (Fig. 1f;
Supplementary Data 1)

However, two clusters
(Neuronal Subtype1, Neuronal Subtype 2) express general
neuronal markers, but do not express markers of any currently
established neuronal subtype in the hippocampus. The functions
of their markers (Fig. 3b) suggest that these clusters may contain
neurons with the potential to differentiate or self-renew

The above analyses implicated the majority of hippocampal cell
types to be vulnerable to mTBI and open the possibility for
investigating the specific roles of each cell type in mTBI pathology


We also found several cell-type specific mTBI responsive genes
that have not been implicated in mTBI previously. For instance, a
CA1 pyramidal cell-specific DEG Klhl2, which encodes an actin
binding protein, was recently implicated in human neuroticism38,39
and showed increased neuronal expression post-mTBI (Fig. 6a).
Klhl2 in CA1 pyramidal cells may serve as a novel link between
mTBI and the increased tendency for neuroticism observed in blast
TBI40


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q58698620)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q58698620)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q58698620&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41467-018-06222-0)  
