
Circular RNA expression in human hematopoietic cells is widespread and cell-type specific
=========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q58779756]  
  
Publication date : 01 of September, 2018  

# Highlights


Here, we provide the first comprehensive analysis
of circRNA expression in human hematopoietic progenitors, and in differentiated lymphoid and myeloid
cells. We here show that the expression of circRNA
is cell-type specific, and increases upon maturation

Enucleated
blood cells, i.e. platelets and erythrocytes, were suggested to use RNA to maintain their function, respond to environmental factors or to transmit signals
to other cells via microvesicles. Here we show that
platelets and erythrocytes contain the highest number of circRNA of all hematopoietic cells, and that
the type and numbers of circRNA changes during
maturation. This cell-type specific expression pattern of circRNA in hematopoietic cells suggests a
hithero unappreciated role in differentiation and cellular function.


--> characteristic circular RNAs 1.4.4

CircRNAs do not contain poly-A tails. As a consequence, they are not detected
by the most widely used RNAseq methods that are based
on poly-A selection. Our current knowledge of circRNA expression is therefore still at its infancy.



nds). PBMCs of 3–4 donors were isolated by
Lymphoprep density gradient separation (Stemcell Technologies). Specific cell types were isolated with CD4+ and
CD8+ MACS beads for T cells, CD14+ beads for monocytes, CD56+ beads for NK cells, and CD34+ beads for
CD34+ progenitors (purity > 98%, as determined by flow
cytometry) according to the manufacturer’s protocols (Miltenyi). B cells were isolated with CD19+ Dynabeads and
detach-a-beads (Invitrogen).


--> Marker-based definition.

Because
this dataset was generated with random hexamers in combination with oligo-dT primers, a slight 3’bias was observed
for linear RNAs. Yet, this did not impede the identification
and quantification of circular RNAs (see below).

--> I wonder how often we can find circular RNAs in scRNA-seq datasets.


To determine the cell-type specific expression of circRNA,
we performed differential expression analysis on the high
confident circRNA that were detected in Figure 3 (n = 489).


Red blood cells and platelets have high expression levels of
circRNA

Figure 4. CircRNA expression is cell-type specific. (A) Heatmap of differentially expressed circRNAs, as determined with DESeq2 (P-adj.<0.05). On the
right, the 14 K-means clusters are depicted (n = 102, row-scaled RPM). (B) K-means clusters (k = 14) depicting the relative expression (Z-score) across
the hematopoietic cell populations. CircRNA gene names with the exon usage in brackets are depicted for each cluster on the right of the grap

Here, we provide a comprehensive analysis of circRNA in
hematopoietic cells. Future studies will reveal how circRNA
can contribute to the regulatory processes in hematopoietic
cells, and possibly in the make up of the proteome. Furthermore, circRNA may be a useful tool to distinguish diseased
from healthy hematopoietic cells and be used as potential
biomarkers, as previously suggested for several other types
of cancers 



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q58779756)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q58779756)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q58779756/P921%3BP4510)  
