
An ontology-based method for assessing batch effect adjustment approaches in heterogeneous datasets
===================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q58757833]  
  
Publication date : 01 of September, 2018  

# Highlights

To study if batch effects across datasets can be observed and adjusted for, we analyze RNA-seq data of 215 samples from ENCODE, Roadmap, BLUEPRINT and DEEP as well as 1336 samples from GTEx and TCGA. While batch effects are a considerable issue, it is non-trivial to determine if batch adjustment leads to an improvement in data quality, especially in cases of low replicate numbers.

We present a novel method for assessing the performance of batch effect adjustment methods on heterogeneous data. Our method borrows information from the Cell Ontology to establish if batch adjustment leads to a better agreement between observed pairwise similarity and similarity of cell types inferred from the ontology.

Alternatively, a classifier can be trained to predict the group variables, like cell types or tissues. Successful BEA is then expected to lead to better classification performance on test data not seen during the training phase. However, this approach cannot be used as an indicator of data quality since the low replicate number does not allow for splitting the data into training and test data (Luo et al., 2010).

Between all terms included in the Cell Ontology (Bard et al., 2005), we compute a pairwise similarity sim(ti, tj) between terms ti and tj using both Jaccard coefficients (simjac) and cosine similarity (simcos) (Pesquita et al., 2009). 

4.1 The ontology score leverages information captured in the cell ontology
To learn about the robustness of the ontology score, we conduct randomization experiments using GTEx data. To this end, we generate 100 sets in which each sample is assigned a random tissue-term from the available ontology terms. For each set, we compute corresponding expected distance matrices and subsequently recompute the ontology scores.

 This is achieved by utilizing information captured in the Cell Ontology.

 Finally, we envision that the availability of multi-omics data of the same samples, as is the case for IHEC, offers the opportunity to develop BEA methods that adjust for batch effects in a joint model that borrows information from other data types (Zang et al., 2016).
 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q58757833)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q58757833)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q58757833&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTY553)  
