
Cnidarian Cell Type Diversity and Regulation Revealed by Whole-Organism Single-Cell RNA-Seq
===========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q58840753]  
  
Publication date : 31 of May, 2018  

# Highlights

An integrative whole-organism single-cell
analysis in Nematostella vectensis
reveals cnidarian cell type complexity and
provides insights into the mechanisms of
animal cell-specific genomic regulation
and evolution.

An integrative whole-organism single-cell
analysis in Nematostella vectensis
reveals cnidarian cell type complexity and
provides insights into the mechanisms of
animal cell-specific genomic regulation
and evolution.

 We uncover
eight broad cell classes in Nematostella, including
neurons, cnidocytes, and digestive cells. Each class
comprises different subtypes defined by the expression of multiple specific markers. 

Non-bilaterian animal lineages, including cnidarians, ctenophores, sponges, and placozoans, have simple body plans and
have been historically considered to contain limited numbers
of cell types. In cnidarians, these cells include a small number
of morphologically distinct neurons, gland cells, muscle cells,
epidermis, and gut (Frank and Bleakney, 1976).

An Atlas of Adult Nematostella vectensis Cell Types


. What we cannot infer from our current
comparisons is whether the cnidarian-bilaterian ancestor
harbored a highly diverse neuronal-type repertoire, which would
have been extensively remodeled in the diverging cnidarian and
bilatarian lineages, or, in contrast, if this ancestor had a very
limited set of neuronal types. Systematic characterization of
other cnidarian species, of early-branching bilaterians such as
Xenoturbella and acoels, and of Cnidaria-Bilateria outgroup species can shed light into this question.
As exemplified here, we envision that applications of whole-organism scRNA-seq can rapidly allow the development of new insights into the evolution of metazoan cell type and tissue-specific
genome regulation. 

# Comments
Interesting model for organizing cell types. Perhaps more insightful than C. elegans. 

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q58840753)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q58840753)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q58840753&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2018.05.019)  
