
Making Linked Data SPARQL with the InterMine Biological Data Warehouse
======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q58881147]  
  
Publication date : 19 of February, 2017  

# Highlights

InterMine is a system for integrating, analysing, and republishing biological data from multiple sources. It provides access to these
data via a web user interface and programmatic web services.
Over recent years, various data providers, notably the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) [14] and PubChem [15], have started to provide their
data as RDF Linked Data in addition to their existing data-access facilities.
Providing information in a common structured form allows a user to download
datasets from one or more sources and perform queries across them using standard SPARQL query mechanisms. When organizations such as the EMBL-EBI
provide a public SPARQL endpoint [14], these queries can also be performed
directly over the Internet, potentially across many different data providers at
once

--> It is not being maintained anymore, though.

The InterMine-RDFizer was developed as part of the MOLD (Model Organism
Linked Data) project. This is a Semantic Web platform, recently developed by
the Dumontier Lab at Stanford University, for publishing model organism data
under FAIR[16] principles. It currently includes 6 MODs: FlyMine, HumanMine,
MouseMine, YeastMine, RatMine, ZebrafishMine.

The RDFizer also links this generated data to Bio2RDF [20][21][22],
one of the largest networks of Linked Data for the life sciences.



# Comments

## Tags
- 1.3.2.3. Bio2RDF and semantic databases


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q58881147)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q58881147)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q58881147/P921%3BP4510)  
