
Single-cell reconstruction of the early maternal–fetal interface in humans
==========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q59068540]  
  
Publication date : 14 of November, 2018  

# Highlights

ere we profile the transcriptomes of about 70,000 single cells from first-trimester placentas with matched maternal blood and decidual cells. 

After implantation, placental extravillous trophoblast cells (EVT) invade through the decidua and move towards the spiral arteries

We combined droplet-based encapsulation (using the 10x Genomics Chromium system)13 and plate-based Smart-seq21


iagram illustrating the decidual–placental interface in early pregnancy. DC, dendritic cells; dM, decidual macrophages; dS, decidual stromal cells; Endo, endothelial cells; Epi, epithelial glandular cells; F, fibroblasts; HB, Hofbauer cells; PV, perivascular cells; SCT, syncytiotrophoblast; VCT, villous cytotrophoblast; EVT, extravillous trophoblast.

--> Nice diagram


 Three decidual NK cell states (...)  We identified three main dNK subsets (dNK1, dNK2 and dNK3), which all co-express the tissue-resident markers CD49A (also known as ITGA1) and CD9 (Extended Data Fig. 8a). dNK1 cells express CD39(also known as ENTPD1), CYP26A1 and B4GALNT1, whereas the defining markers of dNK2 cells are ANXA1 and ITGB2; the latter is shared with dNK3 cells (Fig. 4a, Supplementary Table 7). dNK3 cells express CD160, KLRB1 and CD103 (also known as ITGAE), but not the innate lymphocyte cell marker CD127 (also known as IL7R) (Extended Data Fig. 8a).

--> Clear calling os states


Thus, dNK1 cells are charac-terized by active glycolytic metabolism, and show higher expression of KIR genes (KIR2DS1, KIR2DS4, KIR2DL1, KIR2DL2 and KIR2DL3), LILRB1 and cytoplasmic granule proteins, suggesting that it is dNK1 cells that particularly interact with EVT

n summary, we identify many molecular and cellular mechanisms that operate to generate a physiologically peaceful decidual environ-ment. This cell atlas of the early maternal–fetal interface provides an essential resource for understanding normal and pathological pregnancies.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q59068540)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q59068540)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q59068540/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q59068540&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
