
A web server for comparative analysis of single-cell RNA-seq data
=================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q59133412]  
  
Publication date : 13 of November, 2018  

# Highlights
We developed an automated pipeline to download, process, and annotate publicly available scRNA-seq datasets to enable large scale supervised characterization. 

 We apply our pipeline to analyze data from over 500 different studies with over 300 unique cell types and show that supervised methods outperform unsupervised methods for cell type identification.

 e used established ontologies to determine the cell type that was profiled (Methods) for each cell expression dataset we downloaded. Of the 2481 unique descriptors we obtained for all cells, 1909 map to at least one term in the cell ontology.

 The differential expression analysis we conducted is based on multiple studies for each cell type.
 
 The most common classification among the query cells was “fibroblast.” Recent studies have shown that fibroblast-like cells are common in the brain13, and that brain fibroblast cells can express neuronal markers1

 Aditionally, several studies profiled thousands of cells but published far fewer raw data files, with each raw data file containing reads from hundreds or thousands of cells but no metadata that allows each read to be assigned to a unique cell.

We use the Cell Ontology (CL)19 available from http://obofoundry.org/ontology/cl.html to identify the specific cell types which are represented in our GEO query results. We parsed the ontology terms into a directed acyclic graph structure, adding edges between terms for “is_a” and “part_of” relationships. Note that this choice of edge direction means that all edges point toward the root nodes in the ontology.

We use the name and any available synonyms for each ontology term to automatically identify the matching terms for each sample of interest (Supporting Methods). This produces a set of ontology term hits for each sample. We filter these ontology term hits by excluding any terms that are descendants of any other selected terms (e.g., term CL:0000000 “cell” matches many studies), producing a set of “specific” ontology terms for each sample—for any two nodes u and v in such a set, neither u nor v is a descendant of the other in the ontology.



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q59133412)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q59133412)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q59133412&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41467-018-07165-2)  
