
Creating Structured Linked Data to Generate Scholarly Profiles: A Pilot Project using Wikidata and Scholia
==========================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q59652985]  
  
Publication date : 10 of December, 2018  

# Highlights
In this article, we share our methods for contributing to Wikidata and displaying the data with Scholia.

When data is gathered from publicly available sources (for example, web pages, online catalogs, publications, and bibliographic databases), it can be contributed to Wikidata with references to their sources

Numerous web-based tools for recording and displaying data about scholarly productivity are available to authors, including, for example, Open Researcher and Contributor ID (ORCID), Google Scholar Profiles, and even LinkedIn

An existing Wikipedia table currently lists more than 50 systems—grouping these sites together under the label of “Research Networking” tools (Comparison of research networking tools, n.d.).

Wikidata collects data about any topic—the scope of its content and its contributors is limited only
by the community of users that defines terms and supplies and curates entries.

Wikidata follows the anyone can edit model used by Wikipedia as a way of fostering engagement with the project.

For instance, as seen in Figure 1, the item we created for Una Osili, professor of economics
and philanthropic studies and one of the faculty members chosen for the pilot project.

spreadsheet in Google Sheets to record identifiers pertaining to the faculty. Including
one or more identifier on the author’s Wikidata entry facilitates connections with other data
sources where web users can find additional information about the author. We searched for
identifiers in ORCID, Scopus, ResearcherID, Google Scholar, ISNI (International Standard
Name Identifier), Twitter, and VIAF (Virtual International Authority File). From VIAF, we
used the VIAF ID and the LCCN (Library of Congress Control Number) as well as any
birthdate information present on the authority record. We also searched LinkedIn for faculty
members’ personal profiles.





# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q59652985)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q59652985)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q59652985&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.7710/2162-3309.2272)  
 * [Full text URL](https://jlsc-pub.org/articles/10.7710/2162-3309.2272/galley/201/download/)  
