
Three-dimensional intact-tissue sequencing of single-cell transcriptional states
================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q59753943]  
  
Publication date : 21 of June, 2018  

# Highlights
More than 1000 genes were simultaneously mapped in sections of mouse brain at single-cell resolution to define cell types and circuit states and to reveal cell organization principles.

We have developed, validated, and applied STARmap (spatially-resolved transcript amplicon readout mapping). STARmap begins with labeling of cellular RNAs by pairs of DNA probes followed by enzymatic amplification so as to produce a DNA nanoball (amplicon), which eliminates background caused by mislabeling of single probes.

We began by (i) detecting and quantifying a focused 160-gene set (including cell type markers and activity-regulated genes) simultaneously in mouse primary visual cortex; (ii) clustering resulting per-cell gene expression patterns into a dozen distinct inhibitory, excitatory, and non-neuronal cell types; and (iii) mapping the spatial distribution of all of these cell types across layers of cortex. 

--> Cool method
We developed and applied a technology for 3D intact-tissue RNA sequencing, termed STARmap (spatially-resolved transcript amplicon readout mapping), which integrates hydrogel-tissue chemistry, targeted signal amplification, and in situ sequencing

A five-base barcode (library size of 1024) was designed and built into each padlock probe as a gene-unique identifier to be sequenced, thus enabling multiplexed gene detection (Fig. 1A).

To test whether STARmap could deliver on the initial goal of high-content 3D intact-tissue sequencing of single-cell transcriptional states with the necessary sensitivity and accuracy, we applied STARmap to a pressing challenge in neuroscience: detecting and classifying cell types and corresponding tissue-organization principles in the neocortex of the adult mouse brain..

 The number of major cell types illustrated here (12 in total) can be further broken down (single-cell RNA sequencing can lead to classification into 40 or more subtypes, which is consistent with the readily apparent heterogeneity of gene expression within each type) (figs. S5 and S6). With our targeted 112-gene set and at the size of 600 to 800 cells per sample, all 12 major cell types could be reliably detected without batch effects with highly similar spatial patterning among four biological replicates (defined as samples prepared from different animals) (fig. S7) and matched with published single-cell RNA sequencing results (fig. S8).

  We identified 15 distinct molecular cell types, including six excitatory neuron subtypes (eL2/3, eL5-1, eL5-2, eL5-3, eL6-1, and eL6-2, annotated by anatomic cortical layers), five inhibitory neuron subtypes (VIP, Reln, SST, Lhx6 and NPY, annotated by dominant gene markers), and four non-neuronal types (astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, endothelial cells, and smooth-muscle cells)
  Crucially, despite the read loss, we successfully clustered single cells of the imaging area into 15 annotated cell types and one unclassified type using 1020 genes and the same data analysis pipeline from the focused 160 gene probe set (Fig. 5, B and C, and fig. S13). Three new cell types were identified in addition to the 12 cell types detected by 160 genes (Fig. 5B): eL6 was resolved into two subtypes (eL6-1 and eL6-2), a previously uncharacterized hippocampal excitatory subtype (HPC) was identified, and microglial cells were cleanly identified with an expansion of non-neuronal cell type markers in the 1020-gene set.

  Joint UMAP plot showing all excitatory (HPC, eL2/3, eL4, eL5, eL6-1, and eL6-2), non-neuronal (Smc, Other, Olig, Micro, Endo, and Astro), and inhibitory (PVALB, SST, VIP, and NPY) cell types
  
In general, it may not be possible to fully define brain cell typology independent of such 3D anatomy as well as activity patterns exhibited and experienced by cells during behavior; the nature of input and output communication pathways for the cells in question in fact can form the foundation for defining cell types (35, 36). Toward this end, in situ transcriptomics exemplified by STARmap can effectively link this imaging-based molecular information with complementary cellular-resolution datastreams describing anatomy, natural activity, and causal importance, thus promising to fundamentally deepen our understanding of brain function and dysfunction (2).

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q59753943)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q59753943)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q59753943/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q59753943&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.AAT5691)  
