
A Single-Cell Atlas of In Vivo Mammalian Chromatin Accessibility
================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q59770872]  

# Highlights

Annotation of key regulators and regulatory sequences in diverse mammalian cell types.

Dataset allows resolution of cell types underlying common human traits and diseases.

We identify 85 distinct patterns of chromatin accessibility, most of which can be assigned to cell types, and ?400,000 differentially accessible elements. 

Define the transcription factor grammar specifying each cell type, and to discover in vivo correlates of heterogeneity in acces- sibility within cell types.

Efforts to produce a human cell atlas are in their infancy, chal- lenged in part by the fact that an adult human (70 kg) consists of a staggering 37 trillion cells. By extrapolation, an adult mouse (20 g) consists of a mere 10 billion cells.

We isolated nuclei from 13 distinct tissues of 8-week-old male C57BL/6J mice

Toward identifying cell types, we first generated a master list of 436,206 accessible sites and then scored all cells for the presence of reads at these sites (Figure 1E). 30 major clusters of cells using Louvain clustering. eterogeneity was apparent within many of the 30 major clusters, we adopted an iterative strategy taking cells from each major cluster and repeating t-SNE and Louvain clustering to identify subclusters.

Cell-type identification from scATAC-seq is more challenging than from scRNA- seq, largely because we have fewer guideposts in the literature.

Enrichments of Gene Ontology (GO) terms for genes linked to DA promoters in a given cluster were often strongly indicative of a single cell type (see Additional Resources). For example, genes with significantly open promoters in cluster 3 (likely hepatocytes) are strongly enriched for terms related to lipid metabolism.

After curating a set of marker genes from the literature corresponding to expected cell types (Table S1), we estimated their activity scores in each of the 85 clusters. This enabled the assignment of 51 clusters to a specific cell type.

In total, we assigned cell types to 69/85 clusters; based on the patterns of site usage, seven appear to be mixtures of cell types due to collisions and nine remain unknown (Figure 2D). A summary of all information used to assign cell type labels, including any post-hoc adjustments, is provided in Table S1.

Cell-type representation in the kidney was reasonably consistent between our data and three scRNA-seq studies) but much less concordant in the lung and brain even between two scRNA-seq studies.There are likely multiple contributors to discrepancies, including inherent biases for/against specific cell types with each protocol and data analysis choices made in each study.

An open question is whether cell types distributed throughout the body exhibit tissue-specific chromatin architecture. We first investigated this question by focusing on endothelial cells. Although definitive annotation will require further work, these data reveal that endothelial cells have specialized patterns of chromatin accessibility within and between tissues.

A major fraction of heritability for common human traits and diseases, as measured by genome-wide association studies (GWASs), partitions to distal regulatory elements, which are often cell-type specific.

As similar single-cell atlases of chromatin accessibility are generated and made available for humans and other species, we anticipate rich opportunities for investigating the evolution of cell-type-specific cis-acting regulatory ele- ments, the evolution (or death thereof) of the trans-acting regu- latory milieu within each cell type, and the birth and death of individual cell types (Arendt et al., 2016).

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q59770872)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q59770872)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q59770872/P921%3BP4510)  
