
ComPath: an ecosystem for exploring, analyzing, and curating mappings across pathway databases
==============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q60045097]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2019  

# Highlights
We have curated mappings between three of the major pathway databases and present a case study focusing on Parkinson’s disease that illustrates how ComPath can generate new biological insights by identifying pathway modules, clusters, and cross-talks with these mappings.

Further, the variability in curation team composition, database scope (e.g., signaling pathways, gene regulatory networks, and metabolic processes), and curation guidelines led to the adoption of different (and in many ways incompatible) schemata and formalisms such as Biological Pathway Exchange (BioPAX;7) and Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML;8

Nevertheless, these limitations can be overcome by following clustering and prioritization methods with the manual curation required to interpret the abstract concepts that inherent to pathway definitions (e.g., biological process, cellular location, condition, etc.).

We employed this view to identify the set of genes common to all pathways in M5, a module comprising the two Alzheimer's disease (AD) and two PD pathways from KEGG and WikiPathways. Subsequently, we used the ComPath pathway enrichment wizard to investigate in which pathways the common five genes identified (APAF1, CASP3, CASP9, CYCS, and SNCA) participate. The analysis revealed that they are predominantly involved in apoptosis, an important process in both AD and PD pathophysiology.35,36

). In addition, the mapping catalog promotes community engaging incorporating a voting system where authenticated users can agree or disagree on mappings; this way, proposed mappings with a net sum of votes >3 are automatically registered as accepted.

 Hence, even if the abstraction of pathways as gene sets might not exploit all the existing pathway information, it is sufficient to drive an investigation of the pathway knowledge.


equivalentTo. An undirected relationship denoting both pathways refer to the same biological process. The requirements for this relationship are:

Scope: both pathways represent the same biological pathway information.

Similarity: both pathways must share at minimum of one overlapping gene.

Context: both pathways should take place in the same context (e.g., cell line, physiology).

2.
isPartOf. A directed relationship denoting the hierarchical relationship between the pathway 1 (child) and 2 (parent). The requirements are:

Subset scope: the subject (pathway 1) is a subset of pathway 2 (e.g., reactome pathway hierarchy).

Similarity: same as above.

Context: same as above.

We generated all possible mappings between pathways in each database (KEGG-WikiPathways, KEGG-Reactome, and WikiPathways-Reactome) and prioritized them based on the follow two independent metrics that have been proposed to calculate pathway similarity:10

1.
Lexical similarity between each pair of pathways' names was calculated using the Levenshtein distance.48

2.
Content similarity between each pair of pathways' genes was calculated using the previously described Szymkiewicz-Simpson coefficient.




# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q60045097)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q60045097)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q60045097&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41540-018-0078-8)  
