
High-affinity allergen-specific human antibodies cloned from single IgE B cell transcriptomes
=============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q60128972]  
  
Publication date : 01 of December, 2018  

# Highlights

. IgE antibodies (and the B cells generating them) are rare and thus poorly characterized. Croote et al. performed single-cell RNA sequencing of peripheral blood B cells from patients with peanut allergies and delineated each cell's gene expression, splice variants, and antibody sequences 

Surprisingly, certain IgE antibodies manifested identical gene rearrangements in unrelated individuals. These IgE antibodies showed high affinity and unexpected cross-reactivity to peanut allergens.

Through the acquisition of variable region mutations, these IgE antibodies gained high affinity and unexpected cross-reactivity to the clinically important peanut allergens Ara h 2 and Ara h 3.

Here, we report the successful isolation and transcriptomic characterization of single IgE and IgG4 B cells from humans.

Circulating IgE B cells overwhelmingly belonged to the PB subset (Fig. 1D and fig. S5A), which is in contrast to the other isotypes but consistent with the preferential differentiation of IgE B cells into PBs observed in mice (8).

Differential gene expression between IgE PBs (n = 81) and PBs of other isotypes (n = 96). Positive log fold change indicates genes enriched in IgE PBs.

--> Interesting


FCER2, which encodes the low-affinity IgE receptor CD23, was also highly up-regulated and coexpressed with ADAM10 in 30% of IgE PBs, indicating that a subset of IgE PBs may secrete soluble CD23 (11)

Our transcriptomic characterization of circulating human IgE B cells suggests that an immature IgE PB gene expression program indicative of weakened activation, proliferation, and survival capacity contributes to the short-lived phenotype of these cells.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q60128972)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q60128972)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q60128972/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q60128972&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.AAU2599)  
