
Single-cell analysis uncovers convergence of cell identities during axolotl limb regeneration
=============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q60341043]  
  
Publication date : 27 of September, 2018  

# Highlights
Here we use a combination of Cre-loxP reporter lineage
tracking and single-cell (sc) RNA-seq to molecularly track, for the first time, adult CT cell
heterogeneity and its transition to a limb blastema state.

Notably, we do not find evidence of a pre-existing blastema-like
precursor nor limb bud-like progenitors in the uninjured adult tissue. However, we find that
distinct CT subpopulations in the adult limb differentially contribute to extending bone at the
amputation plane versus regenerating new segments. Together, our data illuminates molecular and
cellular reprogramming during complex organ regeneration in a vertebrate.


connective tissue (CT) lineages


s. Interestingly, the
cycling population contained multiple different cell types including tenocytes, fCT I, fCT III
and fCT IV (fig. S4A). We detected only very few skeletal cells (fig. S4B) likely due to their
inability to dissociate from the skeletal matrix


A pseudotemporal trajectory displayed two branching paths; one transitioning from
progenitors (Mycl, Matn4, Nrep) to non-skeletal cells (Tnmd, Fcn2, Aspn; likely precursors
to tenocytes and periskeletal cells) and the other to skeletal cells (Cnmd/Lect1, Otos)

This analysis revealed a bifurcated path where uncommitted blastema
progenitors branch off into a non-skeletal and a skeletal lineage

We have
demonstrated the importance of genetically marked transgenic axolotl strains for isolating
blastema precursor cells from adult limb tissue and we have molecularly profiled them using
single-cell transcriptomic methods.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q60341043)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q60341043)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q60341043&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.AAQ0681)  
