
Single-nucleus and single-cell transcriptomes compared in matched cortical cell types
=====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q60933812]  

# Highlights

We used well-matched snRNA-seq and scRNA-seq datasets from mouse visual cortex to compare cell type detection

We estimate that the nuclear proportion of total cellular mRNA varies from 20% to over 50% for large and small pyramidal neurons, respectively. Together, these results illustrate the high information content of nuclear RNA for characterization of cellular diversity in brain tissues.

We estimate that the nuclear proportion of total cellular mRNA varies from 20% to over 50% for large and small pyramidal neurons, respectively. Together, these results illustrate the high information content of nuclear RNA for characterization of cellular diversity in brain tissues.

we focused on well-matched sets of cells and nuclei: 463 nuclei and 463 whole cells from layer 5 ofadult mouse primary visual cortex (VISp). We selected VISp because it contains a known variety ofdistinguishable yet highly similar cell types [5] that would reveal the cell type detection limit ofRNA-seq data obtained from single cells or nuclei.

--> Species-level cell types.

we isolated 12,866 tdT-positive single cells by FACS from all layers ofmouse VISp and a variety ofCre-driver lines. Whole cells were collected as part ofa larger study on cortical cell type diversity, which contains a complete description of all Cre-driver lines used for cell collection [6]

expression correlation between each nucleus and every other nucleus and cell. Expression similarity can vary based on sample quality, so nuclei were compared to each other to provide a baseline expected similarity. For each nucleus, the best matching nucleus and cell were selected based on maximal correlation

Intronic reads are required for high-resolution cell type identification from snRNA-seq Next

Including intronic reads for either clustering step increased the number of clusters detected for nuclei but not cells and was likely due to improved detection ofcell type informative genes (S2C Fig).

--> The concept of "cell-type informative" genes is interesting. It is very close to the notion of "marker"

We compared the 11 clusters identi- fied from both the single nucleus and single cell datasets to previously reported cell types in mouse VISp [5]

Fig 4.(A) Cluster dendrograms for nuclei and cells based on hierarchical clustering ofaverage expression ofthe top 1200 cluster marker genes. 11 clusters are labeled based on dendrogram leaforder and the closest matching mouse VISp cell type described in based on correlated marker gene expression (see S4 Fig)

(C) Violin plots of cell type specific marker genes expressed in matching nuclear and cell clusters. Plots are on a linear scale, max CPM indicates the maximum expression of each gene, and black dots indicate median expression.


We estimated nuclear proportions by selecting three genes (Malat1, Meg3, and Snhg11) with the highest expression in nuclei (S4D Fig) and calculating the ratio ofthe average expression in cells versus nuclei (Fig 5B and S5A Fig). Both methods predicted that L4 Arf5 and L5a Hsd11b1 had a signifi- cantly larger proportion oftranscripts located in the nucleus compared to other cell types (Fig 5C).

Nuclear profiling is likely to be less cell type biased than scRNA-seq. For example, single cell profiling ofadult human cortex isolated 75% interneurons and 25% excitatory neurons [11], whereas single nucleus profiling ofthe same tissue type isolated 30% interneurons and 70% excitatory neurons [14], close to the proportions found in situ.

Nuclei and cells were grouped into transcriptomic cell types using an iterative clustering pro- cedure based on community detection in a nearest neighbor graph as described in Levine et al. [45]

--> Concepts of cell cluster and cell type get mixed 

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q60933812)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q60933812)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q60933812/P921%3BP4510)  
