
Semantic Integration of Clinical Laboratory Tests from Electronic Health Records for Deep Phenotyping and Biomarker Discovery: Supplementary materials
======================================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q61226182]  
  
Publication date : 13 of January, 2019  

# Highlights

Electronic Health Record (EHR) systems typically deﬁne laboratory test results using the Laboratory Observation Identiﬁer Names
and Codes (LOINC) and can transmit them using Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resource (FHIR) standards. LOINC has not yet been
semantically integrated with computational resources for phenotype analysis. Here, we provide a method for mapping LOINC-
encoded laboratory test results transmitted in FHIR standards to Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) terms.

Our approach allows readily available laboratory tests in EHR to be reused for
deep phenotyping and exploits the hierarchical structure of HPO to integrate distinct tests that have comparable medical
interpretations for association studies.

For instance, phenome-wide association studies (PheWAS) can exploit EHR data to deﬁne case–control
cohorts for disease diagnoses or laboratory traits and then analyze
associations with hundreds of thousands of genetic variants.

The HPO currently contains 14,184 terms
(February, 2019) including a comprehensive representation of
laboratory abnormalities such as hyperglycemia, thrombocytope-
nia, nitrituria, and increased urine alpha-ketoglutarate concentra-
tion. Here, we present a computational method that semantically
harmonizes FHIR, LOINC, and HPO.

Algorithm for converting LOINC-coded laboratory tests into HPO-
coded phenotypes. We designed an algorithm that inspects elements of a FHIR
resource for laboratory tests and converts the outcome into an
HPO term.

Semantic integration of LOINC-coded laboratory tests in FHIR into HPO terms.

In this example, LOINC 15074-8 was performed twice, and LOINC 2339-0 and 2345-7 were each performed once; the outcomes of all four tests were abnormally high (blood glucose), and so all four outcomes were mapped to the HPO term Hyperglycemia (HP:0003074)

The analysis of UNC EHR data demonstrated the potential of combining deep phenotypes from our tool with EHR data for
biomarker discovery.

In order to efﬁciently perform the biocuration needed to generate the
LOINC mappings, we developed a JavaFX-based annotation tool that
recommends candidate HPO terms to a LOINC test based on lexical
matching between HPO term deﬁnitions and the name of a laboratory test.
The recommended HPO terms were then manually vetted by one of ﬁve
biocurators (i.e., one MD and four PhDs who have biomedical training and
are major contributors to the HPO project) a

The pediatric
terms were additionally vetted on the loinc2hpoAnnotation GitHub tracker
by the entire team of biocurators.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q61226182)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q61226182)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q61226182&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/519231)  
