
Levels and building blocks-toward a domain granularity framework for the life sciences
======================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q61443281]  
  
Publication date : 28 of January, 2019  

# Highlights
s a consequence, there is an increasing need for an integrated system of hierarchies of levels of different types of material entities that helps with organizing, structuring and integrating data from disparate sources to facilitate data exploration, data comparison and analysis. Theories of granularity provide such integrated systems.

I discuss the shortcomings of some applications of the concept of levels and argue that the general theory of granularity proposed by Keet circumvents these problems. I introduce the concept of building blocks, which gives rise to a hierarchy of levels that can be formally characterized by Keet’s theory.

Although distinct from each other, many of them also relate to one another and take subtly different forms when applied in related contexts, which often results in conceptual problems [23]. Oppenheim and Putnam’s [33] theory of reduction, for instance, attempts to explain phenomena of a higher-level science through theories that refer to entities and to theories from the more fundamental science, with the goal of achieving the unity of science. As a consequence, however, levels of material entities are associated with levels of broad scientific disciplines (e.g., physical, chemical) and of their corresponding theories and this is a problem, because it leaves the question unspecified, why objects of, for example, physics, which range from sub-atomic particles to entire planets and the universe as a whole, comprise a single level (Bechtel and Hamilton [44]).

As a consequence, ontology researchers have developed their own approaches to levels, which they call granularity levels, and to different types of hierarchies based on levels, which they call granular perspectives. Ontology researchers provide explicit criteria for identifying and demarcating different levels and different hierarchies. These criteria specify what is called a granularity framework.

I take a brief look at the granularity scheme implicit in the Basic Formal Ontology (BFO), before I introduce the general theory of granularity proposed by Keet [59,60,61] that allows the integration of various different granular perspectives (i.e., hierarchies).

In the other section I discuss BFO’s characterization of bona fide objects based on the identification of different types of causal unity

On the basis of the characterization of hierarchies mentioned above one can distinguish four basic types of hierarchical systems [17, 21, 88]: (i) constitutive hierarchies, (ii) cumulative constitutive hierarchies, (iii) aggregative hierarchies, and (iv) cumulative aggregative hierarchies (Fig. 1), of which only the former two hierarchies are of interest in the here discussed contex

Most granularity schemes suggested in the ontology literature so far presuppose a constitutive organization of material entities [78, 89] (for an exception see [58])

Instead of employing a constitutive hierarchy, biologists have argued that typical biological material entities such as multi-cellular organisms are organized according to a cumulative constitutive hierarchy [17, 21, 88] (Fig. 1b).



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q61443281)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q61443281)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q61443281&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/S13326-019-0196-2)  
