
Ten principles for machine-actionable data management plans
===========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q62565206]  
  
Publication date : 28 of March, 2019  

# Highlights
There is now widespread recognition that the DMP can have more thematic, machine-actionable richness with added value for all stakeholders: researchers, funders, repository managers, research administrators, data librarians, and others.

This paper presents 10 principles to put machine-actionable DMPs (maDMPs) into practice and realize their benefits.

In this paper, we describe 10 principles for machine-actionable DMPs (maDMPs). The larger goal is to improve the experience for all involved by exchanging information across research tools and systems and embedding DMPs in existing workflows.

Authoring DMPs should not be the responsibility of a single person but has to become a collaborative exercise, in which various stakeholders who are knowledgeable in their domains and adjacent parts of the data management ecosystem share their expertise. Only then can we ensure that the right information is provided and can be acted on by others.


Principle 2: Allow automated systems to act on behalf of stakeholders

For example, if the institutional policy recommends open access publishing and the data do not contain sensitive information, then CC0 could be the default setting for data, and CC BY for text and media. There is already a wizard from EUDAT [4] that offers similar functionality.

Principle 3: Make policies (also) for machines, not just for people

Principle 4: Describe—For both machines and humans—The components of the data management ecosystem

For this reason, to implement maDMPs, we need to use controlled vocabularies and PIDs whenever possible. Controlled vocabularies provide a list of common, well-defined terms that can be used to annotate data or to provide users with a limited list of options to choose from when describing their data or associated workflows. 

Principle 9: Make DMPs updatable, living, versioned documents
Principle 10: Make DMPs publicly available


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q62565206)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q62565206)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q62565206&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/JOURNAL.PCBI.1006750)  
