
Opinion: Why science needs philosophy
=====================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q63479773]  

# Highlights


This independence created by philosophical insight is—in my opinion— the mark of distinction between a mere artisan or specialist and a real seeker after truth. (Albert Einstein, Letter to Robert Thornton, 1944)

Present-day scientists often perceive philosophy as completely different from, and even antagonistic to, science.

We argue here that, to the contrary, philosophy can have an important and productive impact on science

Contribution can take at least four forms: the clarification of scientific concepts, the critical assessment of scientific assumptions or methods, the formulation of new concepts and theories, and the fostering of di- alogue between different sciences, as well as between science and society.

Conceptual Clarification:

The definition of stem cells is a prime example. Four different kinds of properties exist under the guise of stemness in current scientific knowledge.

Critique of scientific assumptions:

For example, a philosophical critique of the immune self–nonself framework has led to two significant scientific contributions. First, it was the basis of the formulation of a novel theoretical framework, the discontinuity theory of immunity, which complements previous self–nonself and danger models by proposing that the immune system responds to sudden modifications of antigenic motifs.

Contributed along with other philosophical approaches to the notion that every organism, far from being a genetically homogenous self, is a symbiotic community harboring and tolerating multiple foreign elements.

Philosophy and science share the tools of logic, conceptual analysis, and rigorous argumentation. Yet philosophers can operate these tools with degrees of thoroughness, freedom, and theoretical abstraction that practicing researchers often cannot afford in their daily activities.

But how in practice can we facilitate cooperation between researchers and philosophers? At first sight, the solution might seem obvious: each community should make a step toward the other.


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q63479773)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q63479773)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q63479773/P921%3BP4510)  
