
OSCI: standardized stem cell ontology representation and use cases for stem cell investigation.
===============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q63846546]  
  
Publication date : 25 of April, 2019  

# Highlights

To support standardized stem cell investigations, we have developed an Ontology for Stem Cell Investigations (OSCI). OSCI imports stem cell and cell line terms from CL and CLO, and investigation-related terms from existing ontologies. 

The recent Workshop on Ontologies for Stem Cells and Stem Cell Line Cells (StemCellOW) (https://sites.google.com/site/stemcellow/) aimed to translate stem cell biology into an ontology framework supported by CL, CLO, and relevant OBO Foundry ontologies. This includes defining key ontology terms, ontology hierarchy design, and ontology design patterns for crucial cell processes (e.g., stem cell differentiation, replication, gene expression, and reprogramming), to support applications such as modeling of experimental use cases.

The StemCellOW workshop discussions are crystalized into two main areas of focus that will be described in this paper: (i) Development of an ontology for stem cell investigations, utilizing existing information in ontologies including CL, CLO and OBI. (ii) Applying the resulting stem cell investigation ontology concepts to a use case consisting of an iPSC study of bipolar disorder stem cell gene expression.  

Like CL, CLO, and OBI, OSCI also uses the Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) [9] as its upper-level ontology. OSCI imports all stem cell related terms from CL and CLO. 

Various metadata from different sources were collected, modeled, and represented in OSCI. The three main resources we used include the Minimum Information About a Cellular Assay for Regenerative Medicine (MIACARM) [12], the LINCS metadata standards [13], and the Eagle-i bioresource (https://www.eagle-i.net/).

CL primarily represents native stem cells, while CLO primarily represents stem cell line cells that have been generated and cultured in vitro and maintain the features of in vivo stem cells. OSCI imports these terms from CL and CLO and aligns them naturally under the same common ontology framework (Fig. 1).

The OSCI information can be queried using DL query or SPARQL query (data not shown). With more information added to OSCI, the OSCI query will become a powerful tool to support stem cell and stem cell investigation-related data and knowledge queries and computer-assisted automated reasoning.

The Ontofox tool [10] was used to extract stem cell related terms from existing ontologies and input them into OSCI. The Protégé-OWL editor [11] was used for manual ontology editing.


Diagram showing the generation of glial lineage and neuronal lineage cells from various cell types. These cells can then be used to study bipolar disorder (BD). Large blue arrows indicate directed differentiation

We have developed the Ontology for Stem Cell Investigations (OSCI) to support standardized representation of stem cells in vitro and in vivo and annotation of multiple use cases in stem cell research including describing experimental methodologies, literature mining to identify genes involved in stem cell biology, and integration of data about stem cells and stem cell differentiation.





# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q63846546)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q63846546)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q63846546&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/S12859-019-2723-7)  
