
Staged developmental mapping and X chromosome transcriptional dynamics during mouse spermatogenesis
===================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q63979659]  
  
Publication date : 19 of March, 2019  

# Highlights

ent. By exploiting the first wave of spermatogenesis, we both precisely stage germ cell development and enrich for rare somatic celltypes and spermatogonia. To capture the full complexity of spermatogenesis including cells
that have low transcriptional activity, we apply a statistical tool that identifies previously
uncharacterised populations of leptotene and zygotene spermatocytes


These cells then undergo
spermatogonial differentiation, involving six transit-amplifying
mitotic divisions generating A1–4, Intermediate, and B spermatogonia to give rise to pre-leptotene spermatocytes (pL) and
initiate meiosis2.

To accommodate these events, prophase of meiosis I is extremely
prolonged, lasting several days in males, and is divided into
leptonema (L), zygonema (Z), pachynema (P) and diplonema
(D).

Based on the combination of cell-types, the seminiferous
epithelium is classified into 12 distinct stages in mouse, and
tubules of all stages exist in adult testes (Fig. 1a, b, Supplementary
Fig. 1a).

. Focusing on cells isolated
from adult B6 testis, we identified the major cell populations based
on known marker genes, including spermatogonia (Dmrt1 expression10), spermatocytes (Piwil111), round and elongating spermatids
(Tex21 and Tnp1, respectively12), as well as the main somatic celltypes, Sertoli (Cldn1113) and Leydig cells (Fabp314) (Fig. 1d).

Clustering across all cells identified 8 sub-stages in spermatocyte
and 11 sub-stages within the spermatid population (Fig. 1e,
Supplementary Fig. 2e), for which we identified marker genes that
highlight the dynamic gene expression changes occurring throughout adult spermatogenesis (Supplementary Data 2).


Fig. 2 Cell-type classification by mapping the first wave of spermatogenesis. a Schematic representation of the major germ cell-types and their
corresponding developmental processes. 


# Comments

Really good article!


## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q63979659)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q63979659)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q63979659&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41467-019-09182-1)  
