
Model-based understanding of single-cell CRISPR screening
=========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q64052031]  
  
Publication date : 20 of May, 2019  

# Highlights

MUSIC
facilitates the single-cell CRISPR screening from three perspectives, i.e., prioritizing the gene
perturbation effect as an overall perturbation effect, in a functional topic-specific way, and
quantifying the relationships between different perturbations. In summary, MUSIC provides
an effective and applicable solution to elucidate perturbation function and biologic circuits
by a model-based quantitative analysis of single-cell-based CRISPR screening data.


Second, MUSIC builds a computational framework based on
Topic Models to handle single-cell CRISPR screening data (Fig. 1
and see Methods). The concept of topic models was initially
presented in the machine-learning community17 for discovery
of hidden semantic structures in a text body and has been
successfully applied to gene expression data analysis18–20

By
analogy to the single-cell CRISPR screening data, a single cell
with perturbation can be taken as a document. The gene
expression is analogous to the word frequency in the document.
A topic here represents a specific biological function associated
with a group of highly differential expressed genes. Therefore, a
topic model applied here allows us to examine a set of cells with
perturbations and discover, based on the gene expression in
each, what the perturbation induced biological functions might
b

Two key advantages of the topic model applied here are: (1) it
allows each perturbed sample to process a proportion of the
membership in each functional topic rather than to categorize the
sample into a discrete cluster. Such topic profile, which is derived
from large-scale cell-to-cell different perturbed samples, making
the following ranking of perturbation impact straightforward and
quantitative. As can be clearly illustrated in Fig. 2, compared with
traditional clustering, which makes a hard assignment of cells into
different subclasses, topic modeling just calculates a topic
probability profile for each sample rather than assigning it into
subclasses.

--> Super cool implications for 2.4.4. Multiple topics <-> Multiple types


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q64052031)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q64052031)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q64052031/P921%3BP4510)  
