
An atlas of the aging lung mapped by single cell transcriptomics and deep tissue proteomics
===========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q64096733]  
  
Publication date : 27 of February, 2019  

# Highlights
. Here, we use single cell transcriptomics and mass
spectrometry-based proteomics to quantify changes in cellular activity states across 30 cell
types and chart the lung proteome of young and old mice. We show that aging leads
to increased transcriptional noise, indicating deregulated epigenetic control. We observe cell
type-speciﬁc effects of aging, uncovering increased cholesterol biosynthesis in type-2
pneumocytes and lipoﬁbroblasts and altered relative frequency of airway epithelial cells
as hallmarks of lung aging.

Lung aging atlas reveals deregulated transcriptional control. To
generate a cell-type resolved map of lung aging we performed
highly parallel genome-wide expression proﬁling of individual
cells using the Dropseq workﬂow

The deﬁnition of cell types (clusters in t-distributed stochastic
neighbor embedding (tSNE) map) was very comparable between
old and young mice, indicating that the cell-type identity was not
strongly confounded by the aging effects

The dotplot shows (1) the percentage of cells expressing the respective selected marker gene using
dot size and (2) the average expression level of that gene based on unique molecular identiﬁer (UMI) counts. Rows represent hierarchically clustered cell
types, demonstrating similarities of transcriptional proﬁles

We analyzed age-dependent alterations of relative frequencies of the 30 cell types represented in our dataset. Since the cell-type frequencies are proportions, the data are compositional. Therefore, it is impossible to statistically discern if a relative change in cell-type frequency is caused by the increase of a given
cell type or the decrease of another.

Thus, the combination of tissue proteomics with single-cell transcriptomics enabled us to predict the cellular source of the regulated proteins, which can be explored in the online webtool (https://theislab.github.io/LungAgingAtlas). In the webtool the cell-type speciﬁcity of any gene query can be exported as dot plot in pdf format.

Cell-type deconvolution reveals increase of ciliated cells in airways of old mice


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q64096733)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q64096733)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q64096733&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41467-019-08831-9)  
