
Where to search top-K biomedical ontologies?
============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q64125311]  
  
Publication date : 01 of July, 2019  

# Highlights

Searching for precise terms and terminological definitions in the biomedical data space is problematic, as researchers find overlapping, closely related and even equivalent concepts in a single or multiple ontologies. 


We have implemented seven comparable Information Retrieval ranking algorithms to search through ontologies and compared them against four search engines for ontologies. Free-text queries have been performed, the outcomes have been judged by experts and the ranking algorithms and search engines have been evaluated against the expert-based ground truth (GT). 

We expect that this evaluation will allow researchers and practitioners to apply the current search techniques more reliably and that it will help them to select the right solution for their daily work.

A key barrier for a data publisher, however, is to find the right set of ontologies, terminologies or vocabularies to annotate entities in data sets.
<!-- This highlights the value of Wikidata!     - 1.3.3. Wikidata as a platform for representation of biological knowledge -->

We start the article by discussing relevant related work, followed by the description of two biomedical search services [BioPortal and Ontology Lookup Service (OLS)], a search library (Solr) and an annotation tool (Zooma) and then seven ranking algorithms.

 For instance, Swoogle (which was initially developed to rank ontologies only) [10], Sindice.com [11], Watson [12] or Yars2 [13] allow searching of ontology resources through user queries.

 Falcons [15] is a popularity-based scheme to rank concepts and ontologies.

 We analysed and compared two biomedical repositories with integrated online search services, a local stand-alone search engine and an annotation tool.

 Zooma (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/spot/zooma/) provides mappings between a free-text input and a curated repository of annotation knowledge. This repository contains the annotations that were manually associated with data from sources such as the Expression Atlas [29] 

 The performance of search applications severely degrades with ambiguous search queries when compared with specific/concise queries. After evaluating the technologies, we conclude that, even though BioPortal and OLS outperform all other applications, one should not be chosen over the others by performance alone, but instead each situation (i.e. search scenario) should be analysed to choose which application to use:

 Searching for top-K
Both BioPortal and OLS have good precision in the top three hits

We believe that the proposed benchmark is a good indicator of the performance of biomedical ontology search applications, and we expect that this evaluation will allow researchers to apply the current search techniques more reliably and that finding the best application to fit their annotation needs will be easier




# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q64125311)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q64125311)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q64125311&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/BIB/BBY015)  
