
The Pediatric Cell Atlas: Defining the Growth Phase of Human Development at Single-Cell Resolution
==================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q64112163]  
  
Publication date : 28 of March, 2019  

# Highlights
We discuss here the case for a Pediatric Cell Atlas as part of the Human Cell Atlas consortium to provide single-cell profiles and spatial characterization of gene expression across human tissues and organs. Such data will complement adult and developmentally focused HCA projects to provide a rich cytogenomic framework for understanding not only pediatric health and disease but also environmental and genetic impacts across the human lifespan.

. To also secure these breakthrough discoveries for children, we propose a longitudinal pediatric component within the HCA consortium, a PCA. The plan for a PCA was originally outlined in the Human Cell Atlas White Paper 

What Cell Populations Are Present in and Distinguish Pediatric Tissues?
For the large majority of healthy pediatric tissues, there exists little or no understanding of how cellular processes affect the course of development and maturation, or how pediatric cell populations contrast with those from adults.

As a consequence, the cell types and their molecular states contributing to tissue growth in children might well differ from those during homeostatic cell renewal that serves to maintain a tissue in adult life, though specific concepts of “cell type” and “cell state” still require rigorous scientific definition (Trapnell, 2015) and ontological classification, such as that found in the Cell Ontology (Meehan et al., 2011, Osumi-Sutherland, 2017). 

But it is unclear if the observed differences are a result of specific developmental cell states, unique pediatric or adult cell types, or differences in tissue distribution or proportion of cell populations, all of which may vary in tissues by age, sex, genetics, or developmental stage. 

Comparisons of pediatric, adolescent, and adult single-cell data may also provide insight into how cell types transition from “growing” to “adult homeostatic” states.

. A PCA tissue map that supports “age and stage” requires novel approaches that can combine spatiotemporal classification of cellular attributes in a “bottom-up” fashion with existing “top-down” anatomical and developmental knowledge. Exploratory data analysis of highly complex PCA data will be critical for generating novel hypotheses on growth and development in pediatric tissues. Traditional models for cellular classification during development need to work harmoniously with omics-based single-cell classification strategies in order to maximize utility across the broadest set of scientific use cases aimed at understanding development and pediatric disease progression (Aevermann et al., 2018, Osumi-Sutherland, 2017). Despite the rich resources provided by the Gene Ontology and Cell Ontology to record cellular and subcellular gene functions, much work remains in defining and linking across new and existing ontological terms and frameworks on normal and abnormal development, gene function, cell type, and cell state (The Gene Ontology Consortium, 2017). The PCA will work with the HCA’s metadata team to ensure that the HCA metadata schema in the DCP reflects the richness of pediatric-specific metadata.


 addition, the cellular architecture of human neurons may have unique features, such as human-specific interneuron subtypes (DeFelipe et al., 2006, Boldog et al., 2018), suggesting that elucidating the genetic and epigenetic variability in the human brain through a PCA may discover previously unrecognized cellular patterns that are unique to the developing human brain.

 For example, late fetal bowel is particularly susceptible to serious inflammation called necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), a problem that does not occur in term infants, older children, or adults (Niño et al., 2016).


 The hematopoietic and immune system undergo remarkable changes in the first years of a child’s life, with profound impact on health throughout the rest of the lifespan. Children are born with a relatively naive T/B cell compartment, hypofunctional innate immunity (Collins et al., 2018), and fetal red blood cells. Intrinsic developmental gene expression programs and extrinsic environmental influences over the following years shape the developing hematopoietic system (Schatorjé et al., 2011, Belkaid and Hand, 2014).

 Children can suffer a number of kidney diseases including structural malformations, glomerulonephritis, and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) (Harambat et al., 2012). FSGS, the most common glomerular disease in pediatric patients, is poorly understood, progressive, challenging to treat, and the risk of recurrence in transplanted kidneys can be as high as 30%–40% (Kiffel et al., 2011). 

 While skeletal muscle is home to a variety of cell types, its minimum functional unit is the multinucleated syncytial cell called the myofiber.

 ingle-cell studies of pediatric H3K27M diffuse gliomas have identified predominant oligodendrocyte precursor cell sub-populations, from which stem-like cycling cells propagate the disease (Filbin et al., 2018). A subset of metastatic neuroblastoma often spontaneously regresses without treatment in infants under 12 months of age, but not in older children, highlighting the developmental influence on survival in patients with this cancer (Nickerson et al., 2000).

 

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q64112163)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q64112163)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q64112163&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.DEVCEL.2019.03.001)  
