
CellFishing.jl: an ultrafast and scalable cell search method for single-cell RNA sequencing
===========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q64237155]  

# Highlights
We propose CellFishing.jl, a new method for searching atlas-scale datasets for similar cells.

This trend of sequencing higher numbers of cells is expected to continue until a complete list of cell types is generated.

Cell type estimation accomplished by matching query cells with similar cells found in annotated data sets provides important information concerning the query cells, relying on a single similarity score may result in overlooking significant differences in their gene expressions.

For example, the developmental stages of the hematopoietic lineage from stem cells to completely differentiated cells are often characterized by the expression level of few marker genes. 

Additionally, using scRNA-seq, Park et al. revealed that genes related to Mendelian disease are differentially expressed in specific cell types. These facts indicate that mutually similar cells of the same type but under different conditions can be further distinguished by noting differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between these cells.

We next confirmed that the hashed expression profiles preserve the original differences among cell types by visualizing low-dimensional embedding of the data.

CellFishing.jl evidently includes minor cell types, although the scores are relatively unstable for those cell types.
--> Minority and majority of cell types.

Comparing transcriptome expressions across different species provides important information on the function of unknown cell types

# Comments
What is a "complete list of cell types" !?


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q64237155)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q64237155)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q64237155/P921%3BP4510)  
