
Cell Identity Codes: Understanding Cell Identity from Gene Expression Profiles using Deep Neural Networks
=========================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q64263662]  

# Highlights

The accuracies of simple classification algorithms such as linear discriminators or support vector machines are limited due to the complexity of biological systems.

--> This would need a really strong evidence. It is far from obvious, kernel-SVM produces really good classifiers for example.


After comparing different architectures, we identified a specific structure of deep autoencoders that can encode a GEP into a vector of 30 numeric values, which we call the cell identity code (CIC). The original GEP can be reproduced from the CIC with an accuracy comparable to technical replicates of the same experiment.

After treating the stem cells with a differentiation protocol, an important question is whether the produced cells have obtained true identity of the desired cell type.

--> But, what exactly is the true identity.

the expression of many marker genes is not exclusive to one particular cell type. For instance, Oct4 that is used in many studies as a pluripotency marker3 is also expressed in non-pluripotent cell types such as adult stem cells

--> Mix of characteristic ("pluripotency") and cell type concepts

Although there are many models developed so far to classify a few different cell types, there are few generic
models to classify an arbitrarily large number of cell types with good accuracy, one of which is CellNet11. It is an online tool that can analyze Microarray gene expression profiles of mouse or human and assign them to each of 16 human or 20 mouse tissues or cell types


The preprocessed microarray expression profiles consisting of 20184 unique genes in 1040 biological samples from 16 human tissues or cell types (65 samples per tissue) were obtained from the CellNet package11. The


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q64263662)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q64263662)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q64263662/P921%3BP4510)  
