
The Impact of Pathway Database Choice on Statistical Enrichment Analysis and Predictive Modeling
================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q64743074]  
  
Publication date : 31 of May, 2019  

# Highlights

We have performed an in-depth benchmarking of the impact of pathway database choice on statistical
enrichment analysis and predictive modeling. We analyzed five cancer datasets using three major pathway databases
and developed an approach to merge several databases into a single integrative database: MPath. Our results show
that equivalent pathways from different databases yield disparate results in statistical enrichment analysis.

Further, MPath significantly improved prediction performance and reduced the variance of prediction
performances in some cases. At the same time, MPath yielded more consistent and biologically plausible results in
the statistical enrichment analyses. Finally, we implemented a software package designed to make our comparative
analysis with these and additional databases fully reproducible and to facilitate the update of our integrative pathway
resource in the future.

Our entire analytic pipeline is implemented in a reusable Python package (pathway_forte; see Methods) to facilitate reproducing the results with other databases or datasets in the future.

We found that for two database (i.e., LIHC and KIRC),
the direction of change was inconsistently reported for the “TGF beta signaling” pathway, depending on the database used (i.e., the KEGG representation was activated and the WikiPathways one inhibited).

This finding was specifically pronounced for SPIA, because SPIA
is a topology based enrichment approach and therefore expected to be most sensitive to the actual definition of a pathway. At the same time, we observed that an integrative pathway resource (MPath) led to more biologically    consistent results and in some cases, improved prediction performance.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q64743074)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q64743074)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q64743074&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/654442)  
