
Multi-domain semantic similarity in biomedical research.
========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q64936246]  
  
Publication date : 29 of May, 2019  

# Highlights

We evaluated the two approaches in a multidisciplinary epidemiology dataset by evaluating the capacity of the similarity measures to predict new annotations based on the existing ones. The results show a promising increase in performance of the multi-domain measures over the single-ontology ones in the vast majority of the cases.

The “integrative” approach consists in merging the relevant domain-specific ontologies into a single multi-domain ontology. In case the ontologies share a common upper ontology (as is common in the biomedical domain, where reference ontologies are expected to be derived from the Basic Formal Ontology [30]), this merging means that concepts from different ontologies have now common superclasses, even though they are from different domains.

For example, if several ontologies contain the concept “Cell” <GO:0005623>, the integrative approach automatically considers the concept as a single one; and as such the similarity between subclasses of this concept can make use of their common ancestor even if the subclasses come from different domains (e.g. both “Native cell” <CL:0000003> from the domain of cellular lines, and “Balancer cell” <CTENO:0000057> from the domain of Ctenophore anatomy). In this case, given the common ancestor, our measure is able to provide a similarity between concepts from the different ontologies greater than 0.

However, sometimes the ontologies are not as interoperable as expected. For example, the Foundational Model of Anatomy and the Cell Ontology contain a concept that represents “Cell”, and this approach does not allow the measure to be aware of the fact that both represent the same thing and are, therefore, equivalent classes. On the plus side, these collisions are rare, and their number is decreasing, as the biomedical informatics community strives to create their ontologies in the most orthogonal way, with as much re-usability of concepts as possible [31].


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q64936246)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q64936246)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q64936246&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/S12859-019-2810-9)  
