
Current best practices in single-cell RNA-seq analysis: a tutorial.
===================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q64974172]  

# Highlights

The resulting read or count matrices have the dimension number of barcodes x number of tran- scripts. The term “barcode” is used here instead of “cell” as all reads assigned to the same barcode may not correspond to reads from the same cell. A barcode may mistakenly tag multiple cells (doublet) or may not tag any cells (empty droplet/well).

On a gene level, clustered data are analysed by finding the gene signatures of each cluster. These so-called marker genes characterize the cluster and are used to annotate it with a meaningful biological label. This label represents the identity of cells within the cluster.
While it may be tempting to assume that the clusters detected in single-cell data represent cell types, there are several axes of variation that determine cellular identity

Firstly, it is not always clear what constitutes a cell type. 

For example, while “T cells” may be a satisfactory label of a cell type to some, others may look for T-cell subtypes within a dataset and distinguish between CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. Furthermore, cells of the same cell type in different states may be detected in separate clusters. 

For the above reasons, it is best to use the term “cell identities” rather than “cell types”.

--> I guess we just have to better define cell type.

Before clustering and annotating clusters, the user must decide which level of annotation detail, and thus which cluster resolution, is of interest. 

Identifying and annotating clusters relies on using external sources of information describing the expected expression profiles of individual cell identities.

In the absence of a relevant reference database, cell identities can be annotated by comparing data-derived marker genes with marker genes from the literature or by directly visualizing the expression values of literature-derived marker genes.

It should be noted that the latter method constrains the user to the classical understanding of cell types derived from bulk expression studies, rather than cell identities.

Furthermore, it has been shown that commonly used cell surface markers are limited in their ability to define cell identities (Tabula Muris Consortium et al, 2018). 

for large datasets that contain many clusters, the current best practice is a combination of both approaches. In the interest of speed, automated cell-identity annotation can be used to coarsely label cells and identify where subclustering may be needed.

Note that marker genes for the same cell-identity cluster may differ between datasets purely due to dataset cell type and state compositions.

If relevant reference atlases exist, we recommend using automated cluster annotation combined with data-derived marker-gene-based manual annotation to annotate clusters.

Metastable states Cell-level analysis of trajectories investigates cellular densities across pseudotime. Assuming that cells were sampled in an unbiased manner, dense regions along a trajectory indicate preferred transcriptomic states. When interpreting the trajectory as a temporal process, these dense regions may represent metastable states in, for example, development (Haghverdi et al, 2016). We can find these metastable states by plotting histograms of the pseudotime coordinate.

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q64974172)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q64974172)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q64974172/P921%3BP4510)  
