
An ontology for representing hematologic malignancies: the cancer cell ontology.
================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q64999464]  
  
Publication date : 25 of April, 2019  

# Highlights

We have developed the Cancer Cell Ontology according to OBO Foundry principles as an extension of the Cell Ontology. We define classes in Cancer Cell Ontology by using a genus-differentia approach using logical axioms capturing the expression of cellular surface markers in order to represent types of hematologic malignancies. 

We have demonstrated a proof of concept for leveraging the built-in logical axioms of the ontology in order to classify patient surface marker data into appropriate diagnostic categories. 

The cell ontology
A description of past ontologies that represent cells is warranted as the work presented here directly builds upon these artifacts. The Cell Ontology (CL) was originally developed in 2005 with the goal of representing a variety of cell types from the prokaryotic, fungal, animal and plant worlds. [5] As interest and support has shifted over the years, the scope of the CL has shifted to focus primarily on vertebrate cell types with special attention to hematopoietic cell types. [6, 7] The CL links to other ontologies within the Open Biological and Biomedical Ontology (OBO) foundry via relations from the Relations Ontology. [8, 9] These relations often take the form of has_plasma_membrane_part to connect cell types to appropriate surface markers found in the Protein Ontology. Similarly, the relations, has_high_plasma_membrane_amount and has_low_plasma_membrane_amount are used within computable definitions to denote surface protein expression that is above or below the mean of a population of cells and were originally described in Masci et al., and generally relate to relative expression values determined by flow cytometry. [10] Lastly, negative criteria are also implemented in definitions using lacks_part and lacks_plasma_membrane_part relations.

<!-- Good overview of       - 1.3.1.4. Cell Ontology (and CELDA)  -->

The Foundational Model of Anatomy has been used to annotate biomarkers for brain tumors while the Disease Ontology (DO) has been used to integrate several databases into a cohesive set. [11, 12] Newer ontologies have cropped up in recent years to represent the many facets of cancer care including ontologies representing staging systems (TMN ontology), cancer treatments, brachytherapy (ENT COBRA ontology), and after-care treatment plans that enhance patient engagement (Profile Ontology for Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer Survivors). [13,14,15,16] 

In the current work, we have created an ontology, the Cancer Cell Ontology (CCL), that represents cancer cell types in the domain of hematologic malignancies, namely acute lymphoblastic leukemia, acute myeloid leukemia and multiple myeloma, using immunophenotypes as differentia.

There exist many schemas for classifying leukemia with systems such as WHO classification, the French–American–British classification system, St. Jude’s system and the European Group for Immunophenotyping Leukemia (EGIL) system. [35,36,37] The EGIL system was selected as the backbone hierarchy for the ontology due to a few compelling factors.

The CCL is a natural evolution of the work started on hematopoietic cells in the CL and is the first ontology to represent the cell types of hematologic malignancies.

Perhaps most importantly, we have shown a proof of concept for leveraging the built-in logical axioms of the ontology in order to classify patient surface marker data into appropriate diagnostic categories. The current work will eventually be part of a larger framework involving a combination of FLOCK clustering analysis of the raw flow cytometry data in combination with the flowCL tool, which will be modified to match cell types to corresponding entities in the CL and CCL. [44, 45] 


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q64999464)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q64999464)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q64999464&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/S12859-019-2722-8)  
