
Immune-centric network of cytokines and cells in disease context identified by computational mining of PubMed.
==============================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q64962407]  

# Highlights

Here we report immuneXpresso, a text-mining engine that structures and standardizes knowledge of immune intercellular communication.

We also built a global immune-centric view of diseases and used it to predict cytokine–disease associations. This standardized knowledgebase (http://www.immunexpresso.org) opens up new directions for interpretation of immune data and model-driven systems immunology.

To maximize discovery, research results must transition to organized standardized models of knowledge, on which automated computational processing can be deployed.

uilt immuneXpresso (iX), a comprehensive high- resolution knowledgebase of directional intercellular interactions that was text-mined from all available PubMed abstracts across a broad range of disease conditions.

for each individual sentence, the analysis pipeline tagged cells, cytokines and diseases, as well as standardized terminol- ogy through official ontologies to allow for hierarchical data analysis at multiple resolutions (Supplementary Tables 1–4).

We distinguished between ‘outgo- ing’ relations (describing cytokine secretion by a given cell type) and
‘incoming’ relations (describing events in which a cytokine affected a cell type, either directly via binding or indirectly).

Our machine learning–derived knowledgebase covered 79% of the interactions described in the reference book, yet it was approximately five times larger, containing an additional 3,055 directional interactions.

iX is freely accessible for querying through http:// www.immunexpresso.org, as well as via the ImmPort web site30

--> Site is working. Dataset is a good candidate for Wikidata integration. 

Intelligent systematized interpretation requires having a machine- readable map of how immune components are connected and a for- malized reasoning framework on which one could test hypotheses and refine knowledge. Here we built immuneXpresso, a framework that structures and standardizes our knowledge of immune intercellular interactions, under many conditions, and updates periodically.

To identify mentions of biological enti- ties of interest (diseases, cells and cytokines) within article abstracts, we applied a dictionary-based approach with dictionaries either adapted from standard public knowledgebases or assembled from scratch


For cells, initial testing suggested that straightforward lookup of terms contained within the official Cell Ontology 50 would miss a substantial fraction of cell occurrences in text due to the large number of possible forms of describing cell subsets. This pluralism in naming was hard to anticipate automatically, both when describing cells by name (e.g., 'human CD8+ terminally differentiated memory cell' does not appear in the Cell Ontology and would not be captured by straightforward dictionary lookup) or by cell surface marker combination (e.g., CD3+CD4+CD45RA+ cell), whose delineation in the Cell Ontology is limited. To resolve this, we expanded the Cell Ontology with a manually curated set of synonyms, and, more importantly, introduced a small lexicon of seed words that served as a starting point, an anchor, for cell recognition in sentences (e.g., cell, lymphocyte and macrophage; see Supplementary Table 1 for the full list).


# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q64962407)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q64962407)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q64962407/P921%3BP4510)  
