
Conserved cell types with divergent features in human versus mouse cortex
=========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q71306466]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2019  

# Highlights

Despite this general conservation, we also found extensive differences between homologous human and mouse cell types, including marked alterations in proportions, laminar distributions, gene expression and morphology. These species-specific features emphasize the importance of directly studying human brain.

To transcriptomically define cell types in human cortex, we used snRNA-seq and focused on middle temporal gyrus (MTG) largely from postmortem brain. MTG is often available from epilepsy resections, permitting comparison of postmortem versus live neurosurgical tissues, and enabling future correlation with in vitro slice physiology

For example, superficial cortical layers are expanded in mammalian evolution12 and some cell types, such as interlaminar astrocytes13 and rosehip neurons14, have specialized features in human compared to mouse

Fig. 1 | Cell-type taxonomy in human MTG.

--> Yep, that is what I first brought to Wikidata ages ago

Each excitatory type selectively expressed marker genes (Fig. 2b), although a combinatorial profile was often necessary to distinguish each type from all other types (Extended Data Fig. 7).

e defined 75 transcriptomically distinct cell types, including 45 inhibitory neuron types that express the GABAergic interneuron marker GAD1, 24 excitatory neuron types that express the vesicular glu-tamate transporter SLC17A7 and 6 non-neuronal cell types that express the glutamate transporter SLC1A3

We refer to clusters as cell ‘types’, intermediate order nodes as ‘subclasses’, higher order nodes (for example, interneurons from caudal ganglionic eminence (CGE)) as ‘classes’, and broad divisions (for example, excit-atory neurons) as ‘major classes’.

--> Cool workaround

b, Violin plots of marker-gene (blue, non-coding) expression distributions across clusters (n= 10,525 nucle

--> Damn, I hope there is a table

Supplementary Table 2

Cell type meta-data and marker genes - see Supplementary Information document for full description.

Supplementary Table 3

Provisional cell type ontology - see Supplementary Information document for full description.

Supplementary Table 4

Human and mouse homologous cortical cell types - see Supplementary Information document for full description.

--> Nice

Diverse morphology of astrocyte typesWe identified major subclasses of non-neuronal cells, including two astrocyte types (Fig. 4)

Non-neuronal cell-type diversity and marker-gene expression.a, Layer distributions of cell types estimated on the basis of dissected layer of nuclei (dots; n= 914)

Matching the human MTG taxonomy to mouse V1 and ALM taxon-omies may seem at odds with the finding that excitatory neurons in mouse V1 and ALM cluster separately22, but the magnitude of differ-ential gene expression between cortical areas in mouse is small com-pared with that between species. Beyond similarities in overall diversity and hierarchical organization, most cell types mapped at the subclass level, seven cell types mapped one-to-one, and no major classes had missing homologous types despite the last common ancestor between humans and mice living at least 65 million years ago51 and despite the thousand-fold difference in brain size and number of cells. Therefore, the transcriptomic organization of cell classes and subclasses appears conserved, with species and regional variation found at the finest level of cell-type distinction


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q71306466)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q71306466)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q71306466/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q71306466&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
