
20 GB in 10 minutes: a case for linking major biodiversity databases using an open socio-technical infrastructure and a pragmatic, cross-institutional collaboration
====================================================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q73423432]  
  
Publication date : 17 of September, 2018  

# Highlights

To approach the challenge of linking diverse data, more than technology
is needed. 
New social collaborations like the Global Unified Open Data Architecture
(GUODA) that combines skills from diverse groups of computer engineers from
iDigBio, server resources from the Advanced Computing and Information Systems
(ACIS) Lab, global-scale data presentation from EOL, and independent developers
and researchers are what is needed to make concrete progress on finding relationships
between biodiversity datasets

Using GUODA, 20 GB of compressed JSON from Wikidata was processed and linked to GloBI in about
10–11 min.
Instead of comparing name strings or relying on a single identifier, Wikidata
and GloBI were linked by comparing graphs of biodiversity identifiers external to each
system

<!-- Nice -->

Following an iDigBio hack-a-thon in June 2015, GUODA was created as a pragmatic way to
compute over multiple large biodiversity databases in a mutually beneficial collaboration
between iDigBio, EOL, Kew Garden, and independent developers. 
Catalyzed by various
presentations at conferences, hardware provided by ACIS, 20+ meetings, and several
prototypes (e.g., http://effechecka.org, https://gimmefreshdata.github.io), a general access
biodiversity data integration and analysis environment was created

GloBI is a database of biotic interactions recorded as Organism_1:has_relationship:
Organism_2 (Poelen, Simons & Mungall, 2014) per individual interaction observation or
claim.

<!-- some-some relations -->

Despite the notoriously poor nature of taxon names as identifiers, they are still commonly
used to link biodiversity data. 
A much-discussed solution has been the use of universal, unique, persistent, resolvable identifiers across the biodiversity data landscape, but the social barrier to a universal identifier system has, thus far, proven insurmountable (Nimis,2001; Hardisty, Roberts & The Biodiversity Informatics Community, 2013). 
Rather than rely on name strings or a universal identifier system, this method uses the graph of identifiers to
map taxa across two databases. This identifier-based method has the potential to be faster
and easier than name-string matching without some of the social difficulties of a single
identifier system.

The mapping increased GloBI’s outgoing
name links by 13.7%. This method of mapping across databases using identifier graphs
is faster than comparing name strings and can help find inconsistencies that point to a
disputed or outdated name. GUODA, and systems like it, have the potential to revolutionize
biodiversity science by bringing diverse technically minded people together with high
performance computing resources that are accessible from a laptop or desktop.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q73423432)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q73423432)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q73423432/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q73423432&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.7717/PEERJ-CS.164)  
