
Some thoughts on bacterial classification
=========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q74657187]  

# Highlights
Scientific classification is virtually a branch of mathematics which describes the overall similarities of organisms. Catalogues do not do this. Many schemes of bacterial taxonomy are not classifications but catalogues.

Hierarchical systems are a practical necessity, and simple mathematical methods are useful in bacterial classification. It is not necessary to know the evolutionary history of organisms in order to classify them in a scientific manner.

But whether published or not, bacterial classification is in such confusion that it seems doubtful whether any nonsense can make it much worse than it is.

Important and prophetic paper of Rogers, Clark & Davis (1914) which has been generally overlooked.

The underlying assumption of scientific classification is that there is a
natural order, a system of similarities, which can be discovered by investigation.

--> One of the underlying assumptions. Taken literally, it seems almost self-evident that there is _some_ system of similarities, because that is one of the basis of human rational thinking. There is a meta-scientific aspect to it also, and we profit from classifying what people in general _think_ that exist. Especify and reconcile different conceptualizations, explicip and implicit ones. Sometimes they are even methodologically implicit: the conceptualization is permanently embedded in the methods, in a logical lock that restricts the domain for which claims are valid.

Unless we prove that any particular feature should carry greater weight than another we must either give equal weight to every feature or else give weight on unproven or i rational grounds such as giving weight to features whose initial letter is A.

Overall similarity is the concept of the sharing of many features, not of any one particular feature. Thus in Leviticus (Lev. xi. 19) the bat is catalogued with the birds because it can fly; the modern zoologist classifies it as a mammal, and his reasons are convincing.

Catalogues. The trouble with catalogues is that they are endless, arguable
and of poor predictive value. They appear precise, but are vague, while para- doxically good classifications may appear vague but are precise

in practice we need some device for compressing the information, which is why we use hierarchical systems of classification, with different ranks of taxa to indicate roughly the degree of similarity. God can consider every creature as an individual-we have to group them into such things as genera and species. These are artificial concepts; they have no actual existence. Only creatures exist (Adanson, 1763, Prdf. p. clxiii); Pirie (1955) has well summed this up.

The reason for regarding a feature as ‘essential’ is simply that it always goes with some other feature.

In bacteria there is probably a great deal more genetic exchange than we are aware of at present, which may be one reason why we often find inter- mediate forms between bacterial ‘ species ’

--> In cell types, there is "horizontal transfer" in a different layer of abstraction. Maybe transfer is too strong a metaphor, but modifications in gene expression that bring closer two cells of different kinds. These modifications can happen both in the single-cell level (neutrophil 1 of individual A looks like eosinophil 1 of individual A more than other neutrophil-eosinophil paisr) or at the population-level (neutrophils of individual A look like eosinophils of individual B more than any other individual-individual pairs.
) 

There are ‘points of rarity’ in distributions of features where individuals with certain combinations of features are rare (for instance the platypus is close to the point of rarity between mammals, birds and reptiles) and since we are studying the world as it is we will place the divisions at the points of rarity. No one wishes to classify non-existent organisms, that is to say, those which are infinitely rare.

This leads to the concept of a taxon as a group of strains with many features
in common but not necessarily always possessing any particular feature- what may well be called a ‘species-group.

A hypothetical strain-would be the modoform of the pleiston, and the other strains composing the pleiston might be called sychnoforms (from the Greek ovxvds, frequent). The groups are connected by uncommon intermediate forms (interforms), and this connecting group if it needed a separate name might be termed a gephyran (from the Greek pa, a bridge). There may also be less common groups of strains clustered around the pleistons and connected to them by interforms: such groups might be called oligons (from the Greek GAlyos, scanty). The oligons are each composed of a modoform and of sychnoforms.

The alternative is to define a taxon as a group whose members all possess a specified key feature. Such features should be definable, recognizable and rigidly employed, yet they can neither be defined nor recognized before crea- ting the taxon, and they are not in any event rigidly employed. If, for in- stance, the mammary gland is taken as the key feature of the mammals, how does one define it or recognize it before first making the taxon Mammalia, and is a mouse with congenital absence of mammary glands to be excluded from the Mammalia? A key feature is therefore not a feature for creating a classi- fication, but is one which is useful for easy identification afterwards.

--> I guess we have space in the world for rigid key features. They make things so much more manageable!

There would seem, therefore, to be only one way in which we can decide if a feature is ‘ important ’ and that is by seeing whether it goes closely with other features. Let us examine in bacteria some consequences of the principle of Division by Correlated Feature.

--> This is heavily in line with the idea of using co-expression to classify cell types.

It seems probable (as has happened in other groups which are largely parasitic, e.g. some fungi-see Ainsworth, 1955) that in the past we have in the Enterobacteriaceae made our species too small (Cowan, 1956~); we may be trying to separate the inseparable.

Genusis A+ B+ C-D-
Species 1 is E+ F+ G- H- 
Species 2 is E- F- G+ H+
To indicate the range of variability, we will add ‘tests I, J, K, L variable in both species ’. A common complaint is that generic definitions contain features qualified by the word ‘usually’. There is some substance in such complaints, since this implies that the features listed are not well correlated, but from the theoretical point of view, every feature must be so qualified. If enough well- correlated features are used, the description will be adequate.

Single-feature keys are pernicious since they suggest that the group can be
sharply divided.

It is best to use one temperature for both species, for the risk of all our tests being vitiated seems less than the risk of making our work unrepeat- able. Cowan (1956~) recently made a forceful plea for standardization of descriptions and reform of nomenclature.

We may therefore conclude that the answer to our dilemma is to choose
a middle course. This is at variance with the teachings of those who emphasize the importance of using many strains, The importance of using enough tests is emphasized here, if need be by decreasing the number of strains. There

--> This is at variance too with the current single-cell paradigm of shallow sequencing of many cells. A bit different, though, because depth and number of features measured (e.g.) are not linearly correlated, I think. 

We see a pattern which suggests we have ‘ hit the jackpot ’ ! Is this pattern due to chance? We might have chosen strains and tests which by chance gave the pattern we see. 

--> Nice! Important principles for single cell RNA-seq. Maybe a shuffling/randomization of the expression table followed by exactly the same parameters could be a good basis for comparison. E.g., this could be repeated 1000 times and so simulate a distribution of the expected number of clusters at random. 

The best method of showing one’s results is to publish the full table of all the results with every strain, Editors, wishing to save spdce, will object to this; they should be resisted if possible, for if we condense our table we may lose vital information-literally vital in the sense that our classification will live or die by the information we retain. 

--> When this is an 100.000 x 20.000 expression matrix, editor objections are really sound. How do we proceed then? 

Most of the relevant information will be preserved if we use correlated features for our classification, but there may be imperfectly correlated data which are of great importance

 Having made a significant finding, one has to consider its cause. Statistics will not tell you this. 

 "Four or five such features (not all belonging to one biochemical proccess) would seem to be the minimum for safe division"

 The first taxonomist who conceived of the use of every feature impartially and with equal weight was Michel Adanson (1763). His views were far ahead of his time. He attacked the arbitrary methods of the day and insisted that every part of a plant should be used in making a classification (Prdf. p. clv).

Adanson seems to me to have been right, for the concept of ‘ importance ’ seems to play little part in the concept of ‘ greatest content of information.’ The viewpoint of Gilmour (1940) is close to that of Adanson. Gilmour, on epistemological grounds, reaches the same conclusion as is reached here, that the ideal classification is the one with the greatest predictive value.

--> One can argue that falseability is important for a classification to have a great predictive value.


Similarity is better defined in terms of the number of features which are not
known to be different properties of the same thing.

--> Genes that are corregulated, for example.

The most startling new concept in classification is the ‘ dynamic system ’ of Hayata (1921). This likens the relationships of plants to a net or a sponge, and springs from the observation that there are many cross-relationships between very diverse families. It is an expression of the fact that similarity is multidimensional; there is one dimension for each feature and to represent it one requires multidimensional space, so that the net or sponge is an over- simplification.

--> Multi-inheritance! Ontologies!

The bacterial fossil record is sum- marized by Pia (1928); some substitute may be provided by bacterial genetics -what may be called ‘ micro-evolution.

Since the concept of species is an artificial one, there is no need to make divisibility a bed of Procrustes. At present, we have almost nothing to guide us on the rank‘which should be given to a taxon of bacteria-it is a matter of personal preference

Can we accept the species concept, and all that this implies, or must we view our organisms as a huge spectrum composed of gradually merging forms?

In fact I do not believe that such a spectrum is so continuous that we can never summarize it. The spectrum can, however, be summarized in different ways, as Cowan (1956b) pointed out, to suit the needs of various workers.


The practical man may complain that he does not want a classification
based on correlated features (all qualified by the word usually); he just wants a test to identify a pathogenic bacterium. But, if there is no correlation be- tween pathogenicity and any other feature, it simply means that no such test is known. No re-arrangement of the taxonomy will help him, and if he groups all pathogenic strains into one species, this species means no more than ‘pathogenic strains of genus A’. Is it heretical to suggest that it is simpler to say this rather than to use a Latin name?

Classifications based on the ideas discussed here might with profit be tried
out on viruses and bacteriophages before the taxonomy of these becomes overloaded with preconceived notions of how to do it.

# Comments
