
Comprehensive single-cell transcriptome lineages of a proto-vertebrate
======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q75715838]  
  
Publication date : 10 of July, 2019  

# Highlights
Here we have determined single-cell transcriptomes for more than 90,000 cells that span the entirety of development—from the onset 
of gastrulation to swimming tadpoles—in Ciona intestinalis.

We summarize several applications of these datasets, including annotating the 
synaptome of swimming tadpoles and tracing the evolutionary origin of cell types such as the vertebrate telencephalon.


gastrulating embryos are composed of only 100–200 cells, and swimming tadpoles contain about 2,500 cells. 

Nearly 40 subtypes of neurons were identified, even though the central nervous system of the Ciona larva is composed 
of only 177 neurons

In total, 60 cell types were identi-
fied in swimming tadpoles, and the corresponding virtual lineages of 
these cell types could be traced to blastomeres at the 110-cell stage 
(the time of fate restriction). 


The recently reported Ciona synaptome identified a single Eminens 
neuron (Em2) as a key regulator of decussating neurons8,25. The  
pair of Eminens neurons was identified in our datasets on the basis 
of their expression of marker genes of GABAergic (γ-aminobutyric- 
acid-releasing) neurons and Prop (Extended Data Fig. 8a, b)

We propose that the vertebrate telencephalon arose through the 
incorporation of non-neural ectoderm in anterior regions of the 
neural tube.


o test this model, we examined the expression of a Ciona FoxG reporter gene in Ciona larvae and transgenic killifish 
(Nothobranchius furzeri) embryos (Fig. 4b, c, Methods). This reporter 
is expressed in palp cells of Ciona embryos (Fig. 4b). It also mediates 
expression in subsets of cells in the olfactory bulb of the killifish tel-
encephalon (Fig. 4c), as well as in placodal derivatives such as the lens 
of the eye (Extended Data Fig. 12e). These observations are consist-
ent with the incorporation of proto-placodal gene-regulatory mod-
ules (for example, axial columnar cells) into an expanded forebrain of 
vertebrates


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q75715838)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q75715838)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q75715838/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q75715838&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-019-1385-Y)  
