
Unified single-cell analysis of testis gene regulation and pathology in five mouse strains
==========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q83231314]  
  
Publication date : 25 of June, 2019  

# Highlights

Here we introduce a model-based factor analysis method, SDA, to analyze a novel 57,600 cell dataset from the testes of wild-type mice and mice with gonadal defects due to disruption of the genes Mlh3, Hormad1, Cul4a or Cnp. By jointly analyzing mutant and wild-type cells we decomposed our data into 46 components that identify novel meiotic gene-regulatory programs, mutant-specific pathological processes, and technical effects, and provide a framework for imputation. We identify, de novo, DNA sequence motifs associated with individual components that define temporally varying modes of gene expression contr

Here, we performed scRNA-seq on 57,600 cells from the mouse testis, using wild-type animals and four mutant lines with defects in sperm production (Figure 1B).

To do this, we leverage a recently developed factor analysis method, called sparse decomposition of arrays (SDA),

We added to this an additional 31,400 single cell profiles from four different mutant mouse strains exhibiting spermatogenesis defects: three mutants with known molecular mechanisms (knockouts of Mlh3, Hormad1, and Cul4a) as well as one knockin of a transgene (Cnp) that led to idiopathic infertility. 

Single cell RNA sequencing provides new opportunities to assess important open questions in the field of spermatogenesis. Along with the expected patterns of expression for known markers, we identified numerous novel markers for all populations, some of which we selected for validation using immunohistochemistry (Figure 2). Noteworthy is the identification of KIF5B as a Sertoli cell protein that provides more extensive coverage of the cell body than the conventional markers TUBB and VIM, and the identification of ABHD5 as a marker for the subcellular structure of developing germ cells known as the residual body. Protein products for predicted markers ACYP1, UNC80, and CCDC62 were not detected, which might be an antibody-related problem or an indication that these RNAs were not translated.

Across major cell-type clusters, we identified 22 gene expression markers specific to one cell type or aspect of spermatogenesis and not previously reported. Here we show the expression levels of these genes. Expected protein expression patterns for Nol8, Lrrc34, Abhd5, and Kif5b were confirmed, but the antibodies for Acyp1, Ccdc62, and Unc80 did not show positive staining in any testicular cell types,which could be an antibody-related problem or an indication that these RNAs were not translated. 

To provide further intuition towards how SDA components summarize transcriptional programs, we selected 14 components that, collectively, load highly on germ cells throughout spermatogenesis. When we visualize the total expression output for each cell, ordered by pseudotime, as a sum of all 14 components, it is clear that expression can be modeled as an overlapping series of components in time, coming on and going off gradually over different timescales (Figure 4A–B).

During meiosis an extended prophase I (lasting 14 days in mice) is itself divided into stages: Leptotene, Zygotene, Pachytene, and Diplotene (Oakberg, 1956). During prophase homologous chromosomes pair to enable genetic recombination and balanced segregation during meiotic divisions. In the earlier stages homologous chromosomes begin to associate aided by meiosis-specific cohesin and telomeric tethering to the nuclear envelope (Boateng et al., 2013; Ishiguro et al., 2014). Several hundred Spo11-induced programed double-strand breaks (DSBs) then occour at Prdm9-marked sites 

 Further work will be required to test this, and the potential role of ZCWPW1 in meiotic recombination.
 
However, there remains a possibility that some genes are not shared, such as has been observed for autosomal genes in a mutant heterozygous context: the t-complex responder mutant (SmokTcr) which functions as an antidote in the poison-antidote meiotic drive system of the t-complex (Véron et al., 2009) and Spam1 which causes transmission ratio distortion in Robertsonian (Rb) translocation-bearing mice (Martin-DeLeon et al., 2005).


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q83231314)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q83231314)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q83231314&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.7554/ELIFE.43966)  
