
The meanings of 'function' in biology and the problematic case of de novo gene emergence
========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q83227592]  


Here we explore the use of this word in research papers about de novo gene birth.

Language influences how we communicate, how we think, and how we practice science.

For most evolutionary biologists, function relates to selection. For most molecular geneticists and biochemists, it is associated with a molecule’s activity.

There are those who argue function should mean why an entity does what it does and those who argue it can also mean what an entity does.

Only a small fraction of biologists are aware of the rhetorical context. Most scientific publications do not explicitly include a definition of ’function’.

For a genomic sequence to be labelled as a gene, it must by definition have a function. 

De novo gene evolution: a well-suited test bed to evaluate what meanings of function are circulating in this field and whether, and to what extent, the meanings of function hinder scientific communication.

Applied the constant comparative method of the grounded theory of social sciences to samples of 20 published abstracts in the field.

Authors writing about the function of a molecular object were almost always describing one or more of the following properties of the object: Expression, Capacities, Interactions, Physiological Implications and Evolutionary Implications

Separating these meanings from one another enables communicating with increased precision about what the findings are, helping to avoid fallacious logical shortcuts such as ‘this protein is expressed therefore it is functional therefore it is under selection’.

Our proposed model provides a practical lexicon that maps to prevalent data generation and interpretation practices.

The same instance of the word in the same sentence was most of the times interpreted differently by our team members. 
When the meaning of function is unspecified, the literature in this field of research can become confusing.

16/42 (38\%) instances were assigned two or three meanings. This suggests that this one word is often used to mean different things, and that the plurality of function cannot be easily disentangled.

In summary, our results provide quantitative support to previous assertions that the word function carries convoluted meanings that complicate the scientific conversation. The cultural diversity of readers effectively prevents a unique definition to be imposed in practice.

We endorse qualifying the use of function or avoiding the word altogether. 

We encourage researchers to refine the model, adapt it to other subfields of genomics and other types of biological objects (metabolites, cell types, organs) and propose alternatives.

--> Nice! Calls for explicit definitions

# Comments
Most scientific publications also do not explicitly include a definition of cell type. 

For a cell class be denominated a type it must, by definition, have a function too? Good idea of restricting a subfield and gathering meanings.

Nice experimental approach to measure how confusing a term is. Individual assignment of meaning and consensus assignment after discussion.

Many points can be translated to the cell type discussion!

Explicitly mentions the need for a better conceptualization of cell types.

About 54 references. 


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q83227592)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q83227592)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q83227592/P921%3BP4510)  
