
Single cell transcriptional signatures of the human placenta in term and preterm parturition
============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q83224730]  
  
Publication date : 12 of December, 2019  

# Highlights

 we used scRNA-seq to profile the placental villous tree, basal plate, and chorioamniotic membranes of women with or without labor at term and those with preterm labor

 For the first time, two cell types were identified: 1) lymphatic endothelial decidual cells in the chorioamniotic membranes, and 2) non-proliferative interstitial cytotrophoblasts in the placental villi.

 Herein, we provide a catalogue of cell types and transcriptional profiles in the human placenta, shedding light on the molecular underpinnings and non-invasive prediction of the physiologic and pathologic parturition.


 Figure 1—figure supplement 5.
Alluvial diagram showing the correspondence between our final curated cluster labels and automated cell-labeling methods.
(A) SingleR method using the human primary cell atlas (HPCA) reference panel Aran et al. (2019), (B) SingleR method using the human placenta in the first trimester (HPFT) reference Vento-Tormo et al. (2018), (C) Seurat label transfer method using the HPFT reference Stuart et al. (2019).


--> Very very interesting figure, can illustrate an Wikipedia article or something.  2.4.2.2.2. A posteriori identification in high-throughput metodologies and 1.4.2.3. Cell label identification


Importantly, non-proliferative interstitial cytotrophoblasts (npiCTB) were identified for the first time in the placental villi as forming a distinct cluster. This new cluster was also observed in the basal plate, but not in the chorioamniotic membranes, suggesting that this type of trophoblast has specific functions in the placental tree. The non-proliferative nature of npiCTBs was evidenced by the reduced expression of genes involved in cell proliferation such as XIST, DDX3X, and EIF1AX.






# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q83224730)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q83224730)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q83224730/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q83224730&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q83224730/P921%3BP4510)  
