
Wikidata as a knowledge graph for the life sciences
===================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q87830400]  
  
Publication date : 17 of March, 2020  

# Highlights
 Here we describe the breadth and depth of the biomedical knowledge contained within Wikidata, and discuss the open-source tools we have built to add information to Wikidata and to synchronize it with source databases. 


 As of September 2019, Wikidata's knowledge graph included over 750 million statements on 61 million items (tools.wmflabs.org/wikidata-todo/stats.php).

 Finally, we discuss how researchers can contribute to this effort to build a continuously-updated and community-maintained knowledge graph that epitomizes the FAIR principles.


 A simplified class-level diagram of the Wikidata knowledge graph for biomedical entities.

We generalized the common code modules into a Python library, called Wikidata Integrator (WDI), to simplify the process of creating Wikidata bots (https://github.com/SuLab/WikidataIntegrator; archived at Burgstaller-Muehlbacher et al., 2020). 


Relative to these tools, Wikidata distinguishes itself with a unique combination of the following: an almost limitless scope including all entities in biology, chemistry, and medicine; a data model that can represent exact, broader, and narrow matches between items in different identifier namespaces (beyond semantically imprecise 'cross-references'); programmatic access through web services with a track record of high performance and high availability.

Moreover, Wikidata is also unique as it is the only tool that allows real-time community editing. So while Wikidata is certainly not complete with respect to identifier mappings, it can be continually improved independent of any centralized effort or curation authority. 


A representative SPARQL query that integrates data from multiple data resources and annotation types.

--> Maybe including the SPARQL queries themselves is not that bad...

In our first comparison between Wikidata and the official DO release, we found that Wikidata users added a total of 2030 new cross references to GARD (Lewis et al., 2017) and MeSH (https://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/meshhome.html). These cross references were primarily added by a small handful of users through a web interface focused on identifier mapping (Manske, 2020)

e WikiPathways identifier property in Wikidata informs the Scholia template to source a pathway-viewer widget from Toolforge (https://tools.wmflabs.org/admin/tool/pathway-viewer) that in turn retrieves the corresponding interactive pathway image. Embedded into the Scholia pathway page, the widget provides pan and zoom, plus links to gene, protein and chemical Scholia pages for every clickable molecule on the pathway diagram


We modified the BOQA codebase to accept arbitrary inputs and to be able to run from the command line (code available at https://github.com/SuLab/boqa; archived at Köhler and Stupp, 2020) and also wrote a script to extract and incorporate the phenotype-disease annotations in Wikidata (code available at https://github.com/SuLab/Wikidata-phenomizer; archived at Tu et al., 2020).

We analyzed three snapshots of Wikidata using Rephetio, a graph-based algorithm for predicting drug repurposing candidates (Himmelstein et al., 2017). We evaluated the performance of the Rephetio algorithm on three historical versions of the Wikidata knowledge graph, quantified based on the area under the receiver operator characteristic curve (AUC). This analysis demonstrated that the performance of Rephetio in drug repurposing improved over time based only on improvements to the underlying knowledge graph. 

The open data licensing of Wikidata is particularly notable. The use of data licenses in biomedical research has rapidly proliferated, presumably in an effort to protect intellectual property and/or justify long-term grant funding (see, for example, Reiser et al., 2016). However, even seemingly innocuous license terms (like requirements for attribution) still impose legal requirements and therefore expose consumers to legal liability. This liability is especially problematic for data integration efforts, in which the license terms of all resources (dozens or hundreds or more) must be independently tracked and satisfied (a phenomenon referred to as 'license stacking'). Because it is released under CC0, Wikidata can be freely and openly used in any other resource without any restriction. This freedom greatly simplifies and encourages downstream use, albeit at the cost of not being able to incorporate ontologies or datasets with more restrictive licensing.

As the biomedical data within Wikidata continues to grow, we believe that its unencumbered use will spur the development of many new innovative tools and analyses. 

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q87830400)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q87830400)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q87830400&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.7554/ELIFE.52614)  
 * [Full text URL](https://elifesciences.org/articles/52614)  
