
Mapping anatomical related entities to human body parts based on wikipedia in discharge summaries
=================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q87818346]  
  
Publication date : 17 of August, 2019  

# Highlights

 To achieve this, we establish a mapping system consisting of a Wikipedia-based scoring algorithm and a named entity normalization method (NEN). The mapping system makes full use of information available on Wikipedia, which is a comprehensive Internet medical knowledge base. We also built a new ontology, Tree of Human Body Parts (THBP), from core anatomical parts by referring to anatomical experts and Unified Medical Language Systems (UMLS) to make the mapping system efficacious for clinical treatments.

For explicit anatomical related entities, there are dictionary-based methods (e.g., string-matching) that can conduct mapping. However, quite a few implicit anatomical related entities cannot be mapped to certain body parts by string-matching methods. The reason is that there is no common substring between the entities and the body parts. For example, the following two sentences come from a discharge summary:“Given this, it was advised that the patient have a colonoscopy to rule out further bleeding”.“The patient underwent a flex sigmoidoscopy on Friday, 11-02”.If we use string-matching, colonoscopy which is a medical test can be mapped to colon because of the common string “colon”. However, “sigmoidoscopy”, which is also a medical test related to colon, cannot be mapped to “colon” since the string “sigmoidoscopy” does not contain the substring “colon”. In Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine - Clinical Term (SNOMED-CT) [6], several entities are mapped to more than one terms. Therefore, although there exists some implicit relationships in SNOMED-CT, it is difficult to distinguish the exact concept for one entity in one certain context from more than one matched terms. 

 “extremity” has abbreviations such as “ext”, “extrem”, “ue” (upper extremity), and “le” (lower extremity). There are too many synonyms in medical texts which are difficult to be recognized using limited dictionaries.




# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q87818346)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q87818346)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q87818346/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Mapping%20anatomical%20related%20entities%20to%20human%20body%20parts%20based%20on%20wikipedia%20in%20discharge%20summaries'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
