
Phenotypic Convergence: Distinct Transcription Factors Regulate Common Terminal Features
========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q89128831]  
  
Publication date : 18 of June, 2018  

# Highlights
Drosophila glia and neurons were profiled with Drop-seq and pooled in 52 clusters

s. We sequenced 55,000 single cells and assigned them to 52 clusters. We validated and annotated many clusters using RNA sequencing of FACS-sorted single-cell types and cluster-specific genes. 

Before the molecular revolution, cell types were distinguished by their morphology (Cajal and Sanchez, 1915, Fischbach and Dittrich, 1989, Morante and Desplan, 2008) and, whenever possible, their function and physiology (Kepecs and Fishell, 2014). The advent of RNA-sequencing technologies has allowed us to revisit cell-type classification, identify new cell types, and corroborate pre-existing ones (Macosko et al., 2015, Shekhar et al., 2016). 

<!-- The molecular revolution; nice phrasing -->

To address this concern, we sequenced the bulk transcriptome of single neuronal cell types from the adult optic lobes after FACS-sorting. We selected 17 cell types that are a representative fraction of optic lobe neurons.

In conclusion, we were able to assign 32 cell types to 23 clusters among the 52. This provides an in-depth description of the molecular properties of cell types that were previously only known from their morphology or a few molecular markers.

We then set to identify the transcription factors that regulate the expression pattern of a given neurotransmitter gene in cell types where the highest-scoring transcription factor is not expressed. CG16779 and charlatan were predicted by the random forest model to regulate ChAT’s expression pattern in neurons where ap was not expressed. Similarly, the model predicted three other genes for VGlut besides tj (forkhead domain 59A, CG32105, and CG4328), and one more gene for Gad1 besides Lim3 (eyeless). We only found one gene for Vmat (CG33695) (Figure 6A–6A’’’ ).


Here, we present multiple lines of evidence that phenotypic convergence is a more general phenomenon than has been described in worms. The utilization of the same regulatory mode in nematodes and arthropods hints toward a universal strategy for the generation of neuronal diversity that likely also applies to vertebrates.

There is a neuronal type (cluster 14) whose whole transcriptome resembles glial cells more than neurons (Figure 1E). Like T1, it expresses Eaat1, the glial glutamate transporter. Despite its transcription factor identity, the absence of repo expression and the expression of elav suggest that this cell type is a neuron. It will be interesting to determine its identity and role in the optic lobe. 


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q89128831)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q89128831)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q89128831&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2018.05.021)  
