
The IUPHAR Guide to Immunopharmacology: connecting immunology and pharmacology
==============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q89534525]  
  
Publication date : 05 of February, 2020  

# Highlights

Here we describe the International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology (IUPHAR) Guide to Immunopharmacology (GtoImmuPdb), which connects expert-curated pharmacology with key immunological concepts and aims to put pharmacological data into the hands of immunologists. 

The first phase of curation involved assessing protein targets and ligands that were already in the GtoPdb for inclusion in the GtoImmuPdb. To extend coverage beyond what was already in GtoPdb, we made use of the Gene Ontology (GO) ‘biological process’ annotations to prioritize targets for curation.

Targets and ligands continue to be added to the GtoImmuPdb as new evidence emerges. Ongoing updates are driven by systematic searches of current literature covering immunology and inflammation to identify lead compounds, their molecular targets and pharmacological data.

Ontologies also provide unique accession numbers that identify a particular term, and these are valuable in supporting interoperability between data resources. In the context of GtoImmuPdb, they are also useful in curating protein targets to different categories and in enabling inferred searching. We have used biological processes from the GO35, 36 (geneontology.org) and cell types from the Cell Ontology37 (http://obofoundry.org/ontology/cl.html).


The Cell Ontology is designed as a structured vocabulary for cell types, from prokaryotes to mammals. In a similar way, GtoImmuPdb uses top-level cell type categories, such as Mast cells, because of their relevance in anti-allergic therapies,40 and Innate lymphoid cells, reflecting the growing understanding of their role within the innate immune system in the control of tissue homeostasis, infection, inflammation, metabolic disease and cancer.41, 42 The top-level categories are underpinned by Cell Ontology terms, which in the case of Mast cells includes the terms ‘mast cell (CL_0000097)’ and its children, ‘mucosal type mast cell (CL_0000485)’ and ‘connective tissue type mast cell (CL_0000484)’.

Navigating the database from a starting point of immunological process of cell type
The database contains nearly 200 targets associated with T-cell activation (Table 1). These can be easily accessed via the processes panel on the GtoImmuPdb portal (Fig. 1a). The targets are organized into sections, one for each target class. Figure 2(b) shows how some cluster of differentiation (CD) molecule targets are displayed in the Other Protein Targets section. The GO terms annotated to a target are shown in the third column of Fig. 1(b); summarized curatorial comments are also displayed. In the example of CD28, its role in the activation, proliferation and survival of T cells is indicated. By clicking on the target name, users can view the detailed targets page, which contains the expanded curators' comments and full pharmacological information on the target.

Through the partnership between IUPHAR and the International Union of Immunological Sciences (IUIS) to create standard tools and nomenclature (https://iuis.org/news/2018-iuis-council-meeting-summary/), GtoImmuPdb has been working in collaboration with the IUIS resource, Immunopaedia (www.immunopaedia.org.za). Immunopaedia provides materials for teaching and learning immunology, from the basic immune system to advanced immunology and specialized focus areas.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q89534525)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q89534525)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q89534525&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/IMM.13175)  
