
Principles of Cell Circuits for Tissue Repair and Fibrosis
==========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q89717434]  
  
Publication date : 16 of January, 2020  

# Highlights

A myofibroblast-macrophage circuit for
tissue repair shows three
physiological states

States correspond to
healing, cold fibrosis
(lacking macrophages),
and hot fibrosis
The circuit explains how a
transient/persistent insult
leads to healing/fibrosis
The PDGF autocrine loop
is a potential target for
abrogating fibrosis


In order to understand how a single process can lead to two very different physiological outcomes, healing
and fibrosis, and to understand the timescales of fibrosis, it is important to define the circuit of cell-cell interactions that generates scarring. This circuit involves damaged tissue cells, myofibroblasts, and macrophages (Lech and Anders, 2013; Pakshir and Hinz, 2018; Ramachandran et al., 2019; Wynn and Barron,
2010; Wynn and Vannella, 2016). The macrophages can transition between different states, including
pro-inflammatory M1 and anti-inflammatory M2 states (Braga et al., 2015; Sommerfeld et al., 2019).

 Wound healing involves at least three cell types. The first cell type is the tissue parenchymal cells, such as epithelial
cells, that are damaged, and may eventually regenerate. These cells provide signals that recruit and activate the two other cell types: macrophages derived from circulating monocytes and myofibroblasts derived
from fibroblasts.
The presence of three cell types requires a three-cell circuit. We find that a considerable simplification occurs if we focus on only two of the cell types, macrophages and myofibroblasts, and consider the tissue
parenchymal cells as a source of inflammatory signal that lasts as long as damaged cells are present. We
thus consider the damage signal as an input that we can vary to explore transient versus prolonged injury.
The resulting two-cell circuit approach allows a clear understanding of the dynamics. In the Supplemental
Information we analyze the full three-cell circuit framework and find that it leads to the same essential conclusions (Figure S1).


-->   2.4.3. States, identities, fates, attractors and phenotypical continuity
-->   1.4.4. Types of knowledge about cell types


We used biologically plausible rate constants for secretion, endocytosis, proliferation, and apoptosis
based on experimental measurements (Table 1). We consider these parameter values as a reference set
of parameters, and note that different tissues can show different parameter sets.

--> Super rich table! Interesting for 1.4.4. Types of knowledge about cell types
 but also as many Wikidata-relevant properties.

 Bistability of the Circuit Explains How Persistent Injury Triggers Fibrosis
To study the effect of the duration of injury on fibrosis, we considered the response of the circuit to several
scenarios: injury stimuli consisting of a single transient pulse, repetitive injury pulses, or a single prolonged
pulse (we use the reference parameter set; we examine the response of the circuits with a stable cold
fibrosis state in the Supplemental Information (Figure S3)). We modeled these injury stimuli by inflammatory signals that recruit monocyte-derived macrophages and thus serve as a source term in the macrophage equation (Transparent Methods Equations 13 and 14).


This study presented a circuit for wound healing and fibrosis based on the interactions between myofibroblasts and inflammatory macrophages


Each cell-type has multiple subtypes (such as M1 and M2 macrophages)
and sometimes even a continuum of states (Adler et al., 2019; Korem et al., 2015). 

--> Now they mention M1 and M2 not as states, but as subtypes! That is a cool example for  2.4.3. States, identities, fates, attractors and phenotypical continuity


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q89717434)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q89717434)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q89717434/P921%3BP4510)  
