
Distinct microbial and immune niches of the human colon
=======================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q89748559]  
  
Publication date : 17 of February, 2020  

# Highlights

Here,  we  simultaneously  assess  microbiota  and  single  immune  cells  across  the  healthy, adult human colon, with paired characterization of immune cells in the mesenteric lymph nodes, to delineate colonic immune niches at steady state

There is marked  regional  variation  in  immune  cells  along  the  gastrointes-tinal  tract,  with  type  17  helper  T  cells  (TH17)  decreasing  in  num-ber  from  the  duodenum  to  the  colon,  and  regulatory  T  cell  (Treg) numbers being highest in the colon

In  parallel,  we  applied  single-cell  RNA  sequenc-ing (scRNA-seq) to carry out a census of steady-state immune cell populations in the adjacent tissue and in draining mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs), the results of which are available at the Gut Cell Atlas (https://www.gutcellatlas.org/)

--> Cool, uses cellxgene, which seems like a new _de facto_ standard 


FicollMACSFlow-sortingCD45+/CD4+ CD3+

There were marked differences in the activation and memory status of T and B cells between the colon and lymph nodes, suggesting  that  these  cell  types  are  molded  by  their  environment  (Fig. 2c,d). In the MLNs, CD4+ T cells were typically CXCR5+ and ICOShi  follicular  helper  T  (TFH)  cells,  and  SELL+  (the  gene  encod-ing  CD62L)  and  CCR7+  central  memory  T  (TCM)  cells  (Fig.  2b,c). In  contrast,  colonic  CD4+  T  cells  had  a  more  effector  phenotype, expressing high levels of the tissue residency marker CD69 (ref. 17

As observed previously in the mouse22, subclustering of Treg cells from the MLNs revealed major populations of central Treg cells and effector Treg cells (Fig. 4a). Central Treg cells were defined by the high-est expression of SELL, while effector Treg cells were characterized by genes  associated  with  the  TNFRSF-NFκB  pathway  (TNFRSF9  and  TNF; Supplementary Fig. 4a)

Together,  these  results  highlight  heterogeneity  in  Treg  cell  states  in  the  MLNs  and  colon  and  reveal  a  possible  FOXP3-transiently  absent population. We also infer a continuous activation trajectory of  these  Treg  cell  states  between  draining  lymph  nodes  and  colon,  and  highlight  genes  regulating  Treg  cell  migration  between  tissues  and their adoption of TH-like profiles.

--> Many many many cell types!

We  also  identified  an  additional  population,  termed  Treg-like cells, reminiscent of a CD25−FOXP3loPD1hi Treg population in  the  peripheral  blood,  although  the  latter  was  described  to  also  express Ki67 (ref. 34).


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q89748559)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q89748559)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q89748559/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q89748559&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
