
Single-nucleus RNA-seq identifies Huntington disease astrocyte states
=====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q89763874]  

# Highlights


We have used single nucleus RNASeq (snRNASeq) to uncover cellular phenotypes that change in the disease, investigating single cell gene expression in cingulate cortex of patients with HD and comparing the gene expression to that of patients with no neurological disease.

HD astrocytes appeared in variable transcriptional phenotypes, and could be divided into several different “states”, defined by patterns of gene expression.

Although Hun- tingtin is expressed in all cell types, the neuropathology of the disease shows substantial variation

--> All cell types is _a lot_ of cell types.

Astrocytes in the affected regions of the HD brain show a “reactive” state, generally defined by histochemistry or by an increase in GFAP.

disease- specific cell-type specific transcriptional signatures were described in oligodendroglia in multiple sclerosis [18] and multiple cell types in Alzheimer Disease [31] and microglia in Alzheimer disease [39].

We developed a simple algorithm to assign cell classes
based on the highest proportion of cell-class specific genes (referred to thereafter as Cell classifier tool). The tool also classifies nuclei into master classes (Neurons, Astrocytes, Oligodendrocytes, OPCs, Microglia, and Endothelial Cells). More specifically, each nucleus is given an identity score that is equal to the percentage of genes that are expressed from a cell-class specific gene list. The gene lists used to classify nuclei are based on the literature [36, 63], modified, and are provided (Additional file 2: Table S1).

-> "master classes", cool


To classify astrocytic nuclei into astrocytic states, we used monocle 2.0 [54]. We used the following rules to
assign astrocytes into four states based on log- transformed expression values: Quiescent- SLC1A2 > = 2, MT2A < 4, and GFAP < 3; State-1Q: SLC1A2 > = 2, MT2A > =4, and GFAP < 3; State-2R: SLC1A2 < 2, MT2A > =4, and GFAP > = 3; and State-3R: SLC1A2 < 2, MT2A < 4, and GFAP > = 3. Events that did not meet any of the conditions, or met more than one condition were classified as unknown or ambiguous, respectively.

--> Awesome! That is rule based classification.

Liddelow et al. [27] showed that astrocytes in the
HD caudate nucleus expressed markers of a putative neurotoxic state (A1 state), we compared the cingulate cortex to the caudate using an antibody to C3 – amarker of the A1 astrocytic state


. We found that the Quiescent state is abundant in control astrocytes (49.3%), but low in HD (1.6%). In contrast, states1-Q and 2-R were more abun- dant in HD (37.4 and 14.0% in HD versus 21 and 1.4% in control).

The states of astrocyte reactivity correspond to specific astrocytic clusters (Fig. 6c).

Whether the astrocytic reactivity in HD is a cell autono- mous reaction or a secondary reaction to neurodegener- ation, or both, is yet to be determined.

We have made our snRNAseq data available using an interactive web application found here (https://vmenon.shinyapps.io/hd_ sn_rnaseq/)

Additional file 2. Genes used in gene set enrichment analysis [10], in cell classifier, and discovered cell-type marker genes based on single nuclei RNAseq data

# Comments


Too much information to keep track! 
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q89763874)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q89763874)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q89763874/P921%3BP4510)  
