
Single-cell analysis of human ovarian cortex identifies distinct cell populations but no oogonial stem cells
============================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q89983278]  
  
Publication date : 02 of March, 2020  

# Highlights
 Here, we report single-cell transcriptomes and cell surface antigen profiles of over 24,000 cells from high quality ovarian cortex samples from 21 patients.

Our data identify transcriptional profiles of six main cell types; oocytes, granulosa cells, immune cells, endothelial cells, perivascular cells, and stromal cells. 

Our data do not support the existence of germline stem cells in adult human ovaries, thereby reinforcing the dogma of a limited ovarian reserve.

n the female fetus, primordial germ cells (also called fetal germ cells, FGCs) proliferate and migrate to the fetal gonads where they become oogonia

Oocyte forming stem cells, or oogonial stem cells (OSCs), are the most enigmatic and debated cell type in the ovarian cortex. 

 These OSCs have been isolated from human ovarian tissue using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) and an antibody that targets the C-terminal domain of DDX4 protein14. DDX4 (a.k.a. VASA) is a cytoplasmic RNA helicase specifically expressed in the germline and commonly used as a marker for germ cells including oocytes in adult ovaries15,16,17. 

 he smallest population expressed the typical oocyte markers GDF9, ZP3, FIGLA, and OOSP2 (Fig. 2d, Supplementary Data 1).

 Granulosa cells were identified based on the expression of typical granulosa cell markers FOXL2 and anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH).

Around 10% of ovarian cortex cells were annotated as perivascular cells expressing MYH11, MCAM, RGS5, RERGL, and TAGLN, with enriched gene signatures associated with both pericytes and smooth muscle cells23 (Supplementary Data 1)

UMAP of merged scRNA-seq data of our unsorted ovarian cortex cells (grey) and the publicly available scRNA-seq data set of antral follicles and pieces of stroma picked from ovarian medulla (colored cells)21. Previous cluster annotations of both data sets are maintained21. f Same UMAP as in e, showing the contribution of our cortex cells (colored) to previously reported ovarian medulla clusters (grey). All identified cortical cell clusters joined the medullary cell clusters except from the oocytes that were unique to the cortex data set. The horizontal bars in violin plots indicate median gene expression per cluster. C-sec Cesarean section patient, CL cluster, G granulosa, GRP gender reassignment patient, I immune, TC theca cell, O oocytes, UMAP uniform manifold approximation and projection.




# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q89983278)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q89983278)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q89983278&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41467-020-14936-3)  
