
Functional Annotation of the Transcriptome of the Pig, Sus scrofa, Based Upon Network Analysis of an RNAseq Transcriptional Atlas
=================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q89966082]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2019  

# Highlights
onsistent with the principle of guilt-by-association, we identified coexpression clusters that were highly tissue or cell-type restricted and contained transcription factors that have previously been implicated in lineage determination. Other clusters were enriched for transcripts associated with biological processes, such as the cell cycle and oxidative phosphorylation. The same approach was used to identify coexpression clusters within RNAseq data from multiple individual liver and brain samples, highlighting cell type, process, and region-specific gene expression. Evidence of conserved expression can add confidence to assignment of orthology between pig and human genes.


The annotation of the new pig genome assemblies (Sscrofa11.1 and USMARCv1.0) exploited deep RNAseq data from 27 tissues from the reference Duroc breed (BioProject PRJEB19386). The RNAseq data are available in the EBI expression atlas alongside gene expression atlases from other species (Papatheodorou et al., 2018). However, as there are many tissues and cell types missing from that data set, it has limited scope to drive transcriptional network analysis.

It was not our intention to annotate all of the transcripts. This is an activity that requires a community-based effort and manual annotation (Dawson et al., 2013; Dawson et al., 2017). In the specific case of the brain/CNS-enriched cluster (cluster 4) LOC IDs have clearly been assigned to candidate members of multigene families, notably the large zinc finger family in which strict orthology relationships are difficult to determine.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q89966082)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q89966082)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q89966082&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/FGENE.2019.01355)  
