
Evaluation of methods to assign cell type labels to cell clusters from single-cell RNA-sequencing data
======================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q90052808]  
  
Publication date : 15 of March, 2019  

# Highlights
In this study, we benchmarked five methods representing first-generation enrichment analysis (ORA), second-generation approaches (GSEA and GSVA), machine learning tools (CIBERSORT) and network-based neighbor voting (METANEIGHBOR), for the task of assigning cell type labels to cell clusters from scRNA-seq data.

ur results show that, in general, all five methods perform well in the task as evaluated by receiver operating characteristic curve analysis (average area under the curve (AUC) = 0.91, sd = 0.06), whereas precision-recall analyses show a wide variation depending on the method and dataset (average AUC = 0.53, sd = 0.24). We observed an influence of the number of genes in cell type signatures on performance, with smaller signatures leading more frequently to incorrect results.

. We chose these five methods to represent different categories of algorithms, ranging from first-generation enrichment analysis (ORA) to second-generation approaches (GSEA and GSVA), machine learning tools (CIBERSORT) and network-based neighbor voting approaches (METANEIGHBOR). 

 For the PBMC-10X and PBMC-SeqWell datasets, we used a blood cell type gene expression profile signature compiled by the CIBERSORT developers called LM22, containing 547 genes and 22 cell types (Newman et al., 2015a). We also tested an alternative signature designed for RNA seq data with 17 cell types (Monaco et al., 2019), 

 With the advice of one of the MetaNeighbor developers, we modified function MetaNeighborUS() source code to remove the averaging command ‘cell_NV <- (cell_NV+t(cell_NV))/2’ and compiled the library from the modified source. All methods were implemented in Java, R and Perl (Table 2). The scripts used to run and benchmark cell type labeling methods described in this study are available on GitHub and archived at Zenodo (Diaz-Mejia et al., 2019b).

 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q90052808)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q90052808)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q90052808&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.12688/F1000RESEARCH.18490.3)  
