
Probabilistic cell-type assignment of single-cell RNA-seq for tumor microenvironment profiling
==============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q90003401]  
  
Publication date : 09 of September, 2019  

# Highlights
To overcome these issues, we present CellAssign, a probabilistic model that leverages prior knowledge of cell-type marker genes to annotate single-cell RNA sequencing data into predefined or de novo cell types.

--> Cool, like Garnett

Alternatively, cell types may be assigned by gating on marker gene expression, but this strategy is  difficult  to  implement  in  practice  since  it  relies  on  knowledge  of  marker  gene  expression  levels;  cells  that  fall  outside  these  gates  will not be assigned to any type rather than being probabilistically assigned to the most likely cell type.

CellAssign  automates  the  process  of  annotation by computing a probabilistic assignment for each cell to a cell type—defined by a set of marker genes—or to an ‘unassigned’ class.

Such panels of markers that uniquely identify cell types may be  established  through  expert  knowledge  based  on  the  literature,  databases  such  as  CellMarker,  or  derived  directly  from  resources  such as PanglaoDB (Supplementary Note 3).

--> Cool, mention of 3.1.1. PanglaoDB

The  inputs  consist of raw scRNA-seq read counts and a marker gene set for each cell type of interest. Marker genes are assumed to be overexpressed in cell types where they are markers—not necessarily at similar lev-els—compared to those where they are not

d, Cell-type labels for human liver data from MacParland et al.19. e, CellAssign MAP assignments for human liver data, where marker genes for only hepatocytes, cholangiocytes and mature B cells from MacParland et al.19 were specified

--> Very cool. 


# Comments

Nice algorithm. The Garnett is still cooler to me, but this is top quality.
Has marker matrices for 3.1. Cell-type markers in Wikidata



## Tags
3.5.3. R package for rule-based identification of cell types
1.4.2.3. Cell label identification
3.1. Cell-type markers in Wikidata

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q90003401)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q90003401)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q90003401/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q90003401&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q90003401/P921%3BP4510)  
