
Exciting times to study the identity and evolution of cell types
================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q90182085]  

# Highlights


Questions:
-  How can we define a cell type?
-  What are the molecular mechanisms of cell identity?
-  Can we compare cell types across
species and phyla?
- How did cell types first originate?
-  What computational methods can be used to study cell type biology?

Traditionally, a cell type is s a morphologically distinguishable entity that performs a specific function within an organism.

In the placozoan Trichoplax adhaerens, there are around 50 cell transcriptional cell types, but only six morphological ones.

Variations occur in scRNAseq data also due to variation of cell states;

Tanay proposed the concept of ‘metacells’ which captures cells that likely come from similar statistical distribution. Metacells can reflect cell types or cell states, small variation in secondary gene modules within bigger clusters, or transcriptional gradients.
 
The identities of cells regarding cell types are not static: the cells go through developmental processes such as differentiation or may have their programs re-defined in regeneration and reprogramming. Barbara Treutlein studies these processes.
 
Arendt et al made a full-body cell atlas of Platynereis dumerilii. It currently combines whole-body imaging at the resolution of electron microscopy with single cell RNAseq data.

Detlev Arendt proposed an evolutionary definition of cell types to enable comparisons between species: a set of cells accessing the same regulatory programme driving differentiation (Arendt et al., 2019)

<!-- Several talks focused on cell type evolution in vertebrates. -->
 
Allon Klein (Harvard University, USA) studies orthology between cell types through comparisons in pairs of model systems with different divergence times. He highlighted that, to study the evolution of cell states, it is essential to measure their similarity accurately.
 
It is possible to identify conserved components of GRNs (gene regulatory networks). In larger evolutionary distances the homology of GRN components might be hindered by high sequence divergence.


Mechanisms of cell type evolution discussed during the symposium. (A) Two different hypothetical evolutionary scenarios from a unicellular organism to a multicellular organism with multiple differentiated cell types (last common ancestor of animals). (B) Key mechanisms leading to the origin of new differentiated cell types within animals discussed during the symposium. Different colours and shapes of the cells represent different cell types. The blue arrow represents evolutionary time.

<!-- Very nice figure -->
# Comments

Good assembly of research projects on the evolution of cell types.

Concept of "‘Recombination’ between cell types" as a mechanism to form new cell types in the end highlights the notion of intersected cell types. As they inevitably overlap.
 
 
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q90182085)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q90182085)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q90182085/P921%3BP4510)  

# Reading dates
  > Reading dates functionality became available on July 24, 2023
 * 2023-09-04
