
Gene Ontology Causal Activity Modeling (GO-CAM) moves beyond GO annotations to structured descriptions of biological functions and systems
==========================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q90243389]  
  
Publication date : 01 of October, 2019  

# Highlights
We expect that GO-CAM will enable
new applications in pathway and network analysis as well as improving standard GO annotations
for traditional GO-based applications.

Thus, the GO ontology enumerates the universe of possible functions performed by genes, while GO
annotations specify the functions that have been experimentally observed or otherwise
inferred for a particular gene. In the initial publication, Ashburner et al. (1) emphasized the
independence of each of the aspects of the GO

Figure 1 illustrates how multiple GO annotations for the function of NEDD4 in UVinduced transcriptional arrest (5) are linked together in GO-CAM into a more complete,
integrated model. If standard GO annotations are analogous to phrases of text, GO-CAM
allows us to use these phrases to build sentences, paragraphs and whole documents.


As originally defined by Ashburner et al. (1) and further
elaborated by Thomas (6), a molecular activity (GO molecular function annotation) of a
gene product occurs in a location (GO cellular component annotation) and is part of a larger
biological program (GO biological process annotation).

In addition, a molecular activity can have a causal effect on another molecular activity. 

GO-CAM models use the Evidence and Conclusion Ontology (ECO) for specifying the type of evidence

To enable use of GO-CAM in Cytoscape and other network
analysis tools (15,16), we also provide the causal network in Simple Interaction Format (for
more information on conversion and information loss, see http://geneontology.org/go-cam/
docs).

In addition, the models may also prove useful for pathway visualization. For
example, the activity-based representation of GO-CAMs is compatible with the “activity
flow” diagrams of the Systems Biology Graphical Notation (SBGN) standard (25).


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q90243389)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q90243389)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q90243389&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41588-019-0500-1)  
