
Perspectives on defining cell types in the brain
================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q90361677]  
  
Publication date : 06 of December, 2018  

# Highlights

Despite impressive recent progress, including single cell
transcriptome and epigenome profiling as well as anatomical
methods, we still lack a complete census or taxonomy of brain
cell types. We argue this is due partly to the conceptual
difficulty in defining a cell type. By considering the biological
drivers of cell identity, such as networks of genes and gene
regulatory elements, we propose a definition of cell type that
emphasizes self-stabilizing regulation. We explore the
predictions and hypotheses that arise from this definition.
Integration of data from multiple modalities, including
molecular profiling of genes and gene products, epigenetic
landscape, cellular morphology, connectivity, and physiology,
will be essential for a meaningful and broadly useful definition of
brain cell types.

--> 2.4 The concept of "cell type"

Different research communities use the concept of cell
type in divergent ways, ranging from highly-specific
notions of identifiable single neurons in Drosophila
[6,7] to formulations-based on the connectivity [8] or
the functional or computational role of a neuron [9].

we suggest that each cell type corresponds to a self-stabilizing regulatory program, which acts
to maintain and restore the cell type-specific program of
gene expression (see Sidebar

--> Circular definition, but interesting

In contrast with the core cell typedefining features of a cell type, other downstream properties, such as the expression of effector genes [12], may
vary over time or in response to extrinsic signals but will
generally revert to a canonical pattern induced by the selfstabilizing program.

Despite the intuitive simplicity of the concept of a stable attractor, dynamical
systems theory implies there may be important distinctions among cell types in terms of the type of attractor (e.
g. fixed point, limit cycle, or chaotic strange attractor) [18]
and the types of transitions (bifurcations) they may undergo [19].

--> 2.4.3. States, identities, fates, attractors and phenotypical continuity

While our proposalseeks aunifying conceptualbasis for cell
type, in practice we must acknowledge the limits of objectivity and the inevitability of disagreement: there will
always be lumpers and splitters, each with valid empirical
data and arguments to support their views. The seemingly
simple question, ‘How many brain celltypes exist?’ is more
difficultto answerthanitisto state


Our proposal to base the definition of cell type in the
concept of a dynamically stable state implies several key
empirical predictions. 

--> Interesting that it is a definition that is "empirical". It is not a definition, though, but more of a description.

Similarly, a single
transcription factor, Brn3, wasshown to both establish and
maintain neuronal identity of a population of medial
habenula neurons

--> Over simplification

we may soon be
able to propose causal experiments that could validate
fine cell type distinctions by perturbing their putative
(combinations of) regulators. In the interim, it would be
useful to distinguish between provisional cell types
defined by single cell -omics alone, and verified cell types
for which more detailed causal data and mechanisms of
stabilization are availabl

--> cool, but not appliable to all cell types

Despite the power of high-throughput single cell transcriptomic and epigenomic assays, these modalities likely
do not fully reflect all the relevant differences between
cell types. For example, transient expression of genes
during differentiation can lead to situations in which
mature neurons with different projection patterns show
indistinguishable transcriptomic profiles


A simple type of attractor network appears to
govern the choice of a single odorant receptor (OR) out of
>1000 OR genes during olfactory sensory neuron differentiation [84]. Here, the initial expression of an OR gene
results from stochastic demethylation of overlying repressive histone methylation marks. Expression of a functional OR leads to expression of Adcy3, which in turn
promotes the OR expression (positive feedback) and also
prevents derepression of other OR genes by inhibiting
histone demethylation (negative feedback) [85]. This
‘epigenetic trap’ mechanism ensures that only a single
OR is expressed in each mature olfactory sensory neuron,
and it further enables a cell that fails to express a functional OR to select a new OR for activation. This simple
network shows how thousands of distinct attractor states,
each corresponding to expression of a single OR, can be
encoded and stabilized through epigenetic feedback.

--> That is cool. Each state is a type, thus +1000 types just for OR neurons!



# Comments

## Tags
2.4.2. Modern perspectives of classification of cells


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q90361677)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q90361677)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q90361677/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q90361677&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q90361677/P921%3BP4510)  
