
Why and how medical schools, peer-reviewed journals, and research funders should promote Wikipedia editing
==========================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q90535817]  
  
Publication date : 08 of April, 2020  

# Highlights
 may not be too much of a stretch to consider that Wikipedia today–with all of [its] imperfections–has gonefrom being the least trusted source in the room into perhaps among the most. Serving today as a kind of acci-dental epistemic backbone of the internet

 Approxi-matelyfifteen years into Wikipedia’s existence, and to the present time, studies on Wikipedia’s accu-racy and completeness continue. However, the‘controls’are no longer other online encyclopediasbut professional scholarly literature (Azer et al.2015; Scaffidi et al.2017; Modiri et al.2018; Londonet al.2019).

  I am the‘average Wikipedian’: a male between the ages of 15 and 49 years, English speaking (albeitnon-natively), from a Christian-majority country, residing in the Northern hemisphere and engaged inwhite-collar work. 

  --> Yes! I am not the average Wikipedian! Wait why does that makes me happy?

  Besides theaforementioned biases, other notable Wikipedia biases include recency (better coverage of recentevents) and positivity (showing more positive than negative information) (Oeberst et al.2019)


Inaccurate, incomplete, out-of-date ordifficult-to-understand information on Wikipediacan have profound real-life health consequences.Filling these gaps would align with the bioethical principle ofPrimum non nocere–tofirst do noharm–a component of beneficence.

. Besides the obvious pedagogic value of Wikipedia in the classroom,because Wikipedia has become one of the most trusted and used online sources of medical infor-mation globally, greater active involvement of the biomedical higher education sector (Dunn,Marshman, and McDougall2019) is not only an ethical and moral imperative, but it is highlycost effective from afinancial and information dissemination view point (Thompson and Hanley2018). Although this essay has employed a biomedical lens, its‘tenets’are applicable to other dis-ciplines in higher education, and I encourage all academicians to advocate for Wikipedia involve-ment among their peers and institutions focusing on key gatekeepers of the higher educationecosystem.

--> Ethical imperative! That is strong, and I agree.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q90535817)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q90535817)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q90535817/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q90535817&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/03075079.2020.1749796)  
