
A protocol for adding knowledge to Wikidata, a case report
==========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q90557988]  
  
Publication date : 07 of April, 2020  

# Highlights
However, this swift release of research findings comes with an increased number of
incorrect interpretations (8) which can be problematic when new research articles
are picked up by main-stream media (9). Rapid evaluation of these new research
findings and integration with existing resources requires frictionless access to the
underlying research data upon which the findings are based. This requires
interoperable data and sophisticated integration of these resources. Part of this
integration is reconciliation, which is the process where matching concepts in
Wikidata are sought. Is a particular gene or protein already described in Wikidata?
Using a shared interoperability layer, like Wikidata, different resources can be more
easily linked. 

The syntax of the Shape Expressions was
continuously validated through YaShE and the Wikidata Entity Schema namespace
was used to share and collaboratively update the schema with new properties.
Figure 3 gives a visual outline of these steps.

Automated editing of Wikidata simplifies the process, however, the quality control
must be monitored carefully. This requires a clear data schema that allows the
various resources to be linked together with their provenance 

As an example, item Q14875321, which represents
ACE2 (protein-coding gene in the Homo sapiens species) has a statement specifying
that it has a chromosome ( P1057) with value chromosome X ( Q29867336). In RDF
Turtle, this can be declared as: 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q90557988)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q90557988)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q90557988&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.026336)  
