
Long-Term Expansion of Pancreatic Islet Organoids from Resident Procr+ Progenitors
==================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q90572524]  
  
Publication date : 01 of March, 2020  

# Highlights
Here, we describe a previously unidentified protein C receptor positive (Procr+) cell population in adult mouse pancreas through single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq). The cells reside in islets, do not express differentiation markers, and feature epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition characteristics. By genetic lineage tracing, Procr+ islet cells undergo clonal expansion and generate all four endocrine cell types during adult homeostasis.

In this study, through single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) and knockin reporter mouse model, we identified a new cell population in adult mouse islets that express surface Procr. We interrogated these cells’ potential progenitor properties in vivo. Eventually, we established an in vitro culture system for the generation and long-term expansion of islet-like organoids.


The co-expression of epithelial markers (EpCAM, Krt8, and Cldn10) and mesenchymal markers (Mmp2, Col1a1, and Vim) supported the EMT characteristics of the new population (Figure 1F).


This E14.5 population also displayed EMT features, with combined expression of epithelial and mesenchymal markers (Figure S2C), and shared a gene signature including Rspo1, Fgf1, Dcn, Upk3b, Hoxa5, and Procr (Figures S2D and S2E). Interestingly, while the embryonic population was Ngn3+, the adult counterpart was Ngn3− (Figure S2F). These observations suggest that the adult Procr+ cell has a counterpart cell population existing within the embryonic endocrine precursor cell population. 

Single Procr+ Progenitor Cells Form Islet-like Organoids in Culture

In summary, this study identifies a novel endocrine progenitor in adult mouse pancreas and establishes an in vitro method for the induction and long-term expansion of islet-like organoids. This progenitor population may be explored for their existence in human and for treatment of diabetes.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q90572524)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q90572524)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q90572524&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2020.02.048)  
