
A Logical Model of Homology for Comparative Biology
===================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q90608330]  
  
Publication date : 01 of March, 2020  

# Highlights


Homology is a key concept in comparative anatomy; two important types are historical homology (the similarity of organisms due to common ancestry) and serial homology (the similarity of repeated structures within an organism). We explored how to most effectively represent historical and serial homology across anatomical structures to facilitate computational reasoning. 

Our motivation for undertaking this work, and the context in which we test different formalisms, is the Phenoscape project (phenoscape.org), in which we have been working to demonstrate the value of a semantic approach through the development of multispecies anatomy ontologies (Dahdul et al. 2010, 2012; Mungall et al. 2012; Haendel et al. 2014) and other required resources including taxonomy ontologies (Midford et al. 2013), annotation tools (Balhoff et al. 2010, 2014), and a knowledgebase to hold these structured data (Mabee et al. 2018)

 For example, the series of bones located along the midline between the skull and dorsal fin in different fish species is referred to by different names (“supraneural” and “predorsal”). Given the homology of these series across all fishes (Mabee 1988), they are represented in the Uberon anatomy ontology by a single concept under the term “supraneural” with the exact synonym “predorsal.”

Synonymizing also does not suffice in cases where the homology is uncertain. For example, the “alular digit” (the first digit in bird wings) is considered by many, on the basis of paleontological evidence (Wagner and Gauthier 1999), to be a homolog of the first digit in other vertebrates (the “manual digit 1”). However, these are typically not considered homologous on the basis of developmental data (Burke and Feduccia 1997; Feduccia 1999).

This approach, to capture hypotheses of homology independently of structural and functional information, was supported by Haendel et al. (2008), who further proposed a new relationship, homologous_to, to be included in the OBO Relations Ontology. This relationship was defined and formalized, along with not_homologous_to by Travillian et al. (2011), who implemented them in the Vertebrate Bridging Ontology (VBO)

Homology, in fact, is similarly woven into the names of many if not most anatomical structures (Bastian et al. 2008), and a multispecies anatomy ontology, therefore, cannot be characterized as “homology-free” (Manda et al. 2016).

Biological Expectations for Homology Reasoning
To evaluate the consequences of applying a formal homology relationship between anatomical structures, we establish specific user expectations in the form of competency questions (Grüninger and Fox 1995; Malheiros and Freitas 2017) for the results of a description logic (DL) query of our demonstration ontology. Competency questions are a set of questions that an ontology must answer using the knowledge represented by its axioms (Grüninger and Fox 1995; Malheiros and Freitas 2017). 


Consensus concerning the homology of many structures may never be achieved, as different lines of evidence can point in opposing directions

Because of the iterative nature of homology hypothesis development, these products may provide new evidence for the common ancestry versus convergent nature of particular features. In summary, enabling machines to reason the various types of similarity (evolutionary, structural, functional, etc.) is a challenging but promising area for future work in the area of phenotype-driven knowledge discovery.



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q90608330)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q90608330)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q90608330&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/SYSBIO/SYZ067)  
