
Multimodal Analysis of Cell Types in a Hypothalamic Node Controlling Social Behavior
====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q90798324]  
  
Publication date : 01 of October, 2019  

# Highlights
Single-cell RNA sequencing of the mouse
ventrolateral subdivision of the
ventromedial hypothalamus, a brain
region that contains 4,000 neurons and
controls innate social behaviors including
aggression and mounting, reveals several
transcriptomic cell types that differ
between males and females.

SMART-seq and 10x platforms reveal 17 transcriptomic cell
types (T-types) in VMHvl
d Multiplexed smFISH confirms scRNA-seq and identifies Ttypes with A-P restrictions
d Rare female- and male-specific T-types are found among the
Esr1+ subclusters

Cell types are a fundamental unit of organization and specificity in multicellular organisms.

--> Strong claim, but nevertheless accurate

While such correspondence
is well established for retinal cell types (Macosko et al.,
2015; Seung and Su¨ mbu¨ l, 2014), it is not yet clear whether
this principle extends to the central brain. For example, out
of over a hundred cortical T-types (Tasic et al., 2018), only
two have been shown to project to different subcortical targets
and to exert distinct functions in motor control (Economo
et al., 2018).

Cellular subpopulations
in VMHvl have been identified using morphology (Millhouse,
1973a; b), molecular markers (Correa et al., 2015; Xu et al.,
2012), and bulk RNA-seq (Hashikawa et al., 2017a), but the
behavioral function and connectivity of these populations
were not established.

Our results identify 17 T-types in this subnucleus
alone, a density (160 T-types/mm3 tissue sampled) 3- to 68-
fold higher than reported in previous studies

Linking Transcriptomic Identity to Activity by Act-Seq
Electrophysiology, c-fos catFISH in situ hybridization (Lin et al.,
2011), and in vivo calcium imaging (Remedios et al., 2017)
studies have revealed that VMHvl in males contains distinct,
largely non-overlapping, populations of neurons that are active
during social interactions with males versus females.


A previous study demonstrated that female VMHvl contains
two distinct subpopulations of Esr1+ neurons: one, activated
during mating, is located in a subregion called VHMpvll; the
other, activated during aggression, is located in subregion
VMHpvlm

). Our results reveal 30 T-types in
VMH and 17 T-types in VMHvl alone. Similarly, 35 T-types were
identified in the arcuate nucleus, which controls feeding and is of
comparable size to VMH (Campbell et al., 2017). These results
suggest that the total number of hypothalamic cell types has
been significantly underestimated.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q90798324)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q90798324)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q90798324&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2019.09.020)  
