
Molecular Diversity and Specializations among the Cells of the Adult Mouse Brain
================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q90872162]  
  
Publication date : 01 of August, 2018  

# Highlights
we used Drop-seq to profile RNA expression in 690,000 individual cells sampled from 9 regions of the adult mouse brain
Systematic neuronal classifications for two complex basal ganglia nuclei and the striatum revealed a rare population of spiny projection neurons. This adult mouse brain cell atlas, accessible through interactive online software (DropViz), serves as a reference for development, disease, and evolution.

In the globus pallidus externus (GPe) and substantia nigra reticulata (SNr), where neuron types are not well understood, we propose neuron-type classifications and identify selective markers for each population. 

Mural cells have two subtypes: pericytes, which associate with capillaries, and smooth muscle alpha actin (SMA) cells, which associate with larger-bore vasculature and control blood flow (Hill et al., 2015, Hughes and Chan-Ling, 2004, Nehls and Drenckhahn, 1991). 
Our data also identify new mural cell diversity. For example, cluster 1 expressed pericyte (Rgs5) and SMA (Acta2) markers. Unique markers (e.g., Aldh1a1) will help determine the anatomical identify of this population (Data S4E).

Cell states involve constellations of co-expressed genes that enact cellular functions. In neurons, the most well-studied state involves the immediate early genes (IEGs), which are transcribed in response to the Ca2+ influx that follows action potentials (Bading, 2013, Hrvatin et al., 2017). IEG expression is largely uniform across neuronal types (Hrvatin et al., 2017) and brain regions and exhibits little background expression, making it straightforward to detect in the Drop-seq data.

Functional imperatives constrain patterns of gene co-expression in unknown ways. To analyze co-expression relationships across diverse brain cell types and states, we utilized gene-expression profiles for the 565 cell populations (averaging 565 cells and 1.9 million UMIs per population); these data are less influenced by biological and statistical noise than single-cell-level data


We identified 323 neuronal subclusters across 9 regions (Data S3). Here, we illustrate systematic neuron classification using three disease-relevant nuclei of the basal ganglia (Albin et al., 1989). Neurons of the striatum have been extensively characterized, yet neurons of the GPe and SNr have received less attention (Figure 1 and Data S1).

. Two principal categories distinguish SPN subsets. The first—based on divergent axonal projections and dopamine signaling—assigns SPNs to similarly numerous “direct” (dSPN) and “indirect” (iSPN) pathways (Albin et al., 1989).

The second—based on processing limbic versus sensory/motor information—groups SPNs into spatial compartments, the so-called “patch” and “matrix” (Gerfen, 1992, Graybiel and Ragsdale, 1978). Both dSPNs and iSPNs are present in the patch and matrix.
. We hope that single-cell gene expression profiles, and the patterns present among very many such profiles, can function as a lingua franca for discussing—and functionally dissecting—the cellular diversity of the adult brain.



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q90872162)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q90872162)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q90872162&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2018.07.028)  
