
Comprehensive anatomic ontologies for lung development: A comparison of alveolar formation and maturation within mouse and human lung
=====================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q90939015]  
  
Publication date : 24 of October, 2019  

# Highlights

While the general anatomic organization of the lung is similar for these two species, there are significant variations in the lung’s architectural organization, distribution of connective tissue, and cellular composition along the respiratory tract. Anatomic ontologies for both species were constructed as partonomic hierarchies and organized along the lung’s proximal-distal axis into respiratory, vascular, neural, and immunologic components.

This comparative approach eliminated redundancy and inconsistent terminology, enabling us to differentiate true anatomic variations between mouse and human lungs. As a result, approximately 300 terms for fetal and postnatal lung structures, tissues, and cells were identified for each species.

These ontologies provide a unique resource for the LungMAP, as well as for the broader scientific community.

In recent years, ontologies have become indispensable tools for various molecular anatomy and atlas projects, including GUDMAP, molecular anatomy of genitourinary tract development in the mouse [2, 3]; Brain Maps 4.0, neuroanatomy of the rat brain [4]; Xenbase, Xenopus anatomy and development [5]; and FaceBase, craniofacial anatomy, development and malformations in a variety of species [6]. Ontologies

Development of the lung is divided into several stages that extend throughout the fetal and postnatal periods of life [17, 30]. These stages include the embryonic, pseudoglandular, canalicular, saccular, and alveolar stages, which describe the histologic changes observed during development of the lung [17, 30,31,32,33,34,35].

Annotation and retrieval of information from these diverse datasets require a standardized vocabulary to integrate the molecular data with anatomic, histologic, and cellular imaging, in order to identify functionally and/or anatomically defined cell types in the developing lung.

To our knowledge, this is the first ontology to include terminology specific for developmental structures in the mouse and human lung, including pulmonary, vascular, neural and immunologic components critical for lung function. It is also the first time that specific cell types have been incorporated into an anatomic ontology for the lung.

 In addition, developmental staging, specific terminology, and definitions for fetal lung structures and cells were often lacking in these established ontologies. As a result, we decided initially to organize the anatomic ontology for the mouse lung into four separate developmental time periods, or age_range(s) (Fig. 1),

 Considering the lung has over 40 different cell types that have been classified primarily by location, histology, function, and ultrastructural features [67,68,69,70,71], we integrated both general (e.g., epithelial, endothelial, interstitial cells) and specific (e.g., basal, ciliated, mucous, alveolar type II cells) cell types into the anatomic ontology.

 This ontology for the mouse contains 283 terms, including 167 for anatomic structures, 48 for tissues, and 68 for cells, which are distributed by developmental age and organ system (Table 1).

 Table 4 Distribution of terms for the mouse lung drawn from existing ontologies and resources
From: Comprehensive anatomic ontologies for lung development: A comparison of alveolar formation and maturation within mouse and human lung

Category	NoNo.	%	Ontology	No.
Anatomic ontologies	15,144	51%	Uber Anatomy Ontology (UBERON)	68
Foundational Model of Anatomy (FMA)	34
Cell Ontology (CL)	38
Human Developmental Anatomy
Ontology, abstract version 2 (EHDAA2)	4

 the human lung, the more proximal, intrapulmonary, cartilaginous airways (bronchi) resemble that of the trachea and are lined by tall, pseudostratified, columnar epithelia composed of basal, ciliated, club, serous, mucus, intermediate and neuroendocrine cells, and exhibit abundant submucosal glands. In contrast, the more proximal intrapulmonary conducting airways (bronchioles) of the mouse are lined by low columnar epithelia, composed primarily of ciliated and club cells with clusters of neuroendocrine cells largely located at airway branch points. There are no basal cells and only rare mucous cells. In the human lung, the respiratory bronchioles are lined by cuboidal epithelia, alternating with thin-walled alveoli lined by squamous alveolar type I pneumocytes. In the mouse, the terminal bronchioles are lined by cuboidal epithelial cells with an abrupt transition (bronchioalveoar duct junction) to the alveolar duct, which is lined by squamous type I pneumocytes. In general, the relative proportion of these different cell types varies along the proximal-distal axis in both human and mouse airways [28, 89, 90]. While the variation in cell types between human and mouse airways are captured in these ontologies, the relative proportions of these cells along the conducting airway are not.

 Therefore, including them as synonyms enables our users to find these terms in the LungMAP ontologies. For example, we changed alveolar septum to interalveolar septum (UBERON_0004893), lymphoid macrophage to lymph node macrophage (CL_0000868), and right anterior basal bronchus to right anterior basal segmental bronchus (FMA7418), and then added our original terms as synonyms.

 Terms with names found in existing BioPortal vocabularies or lexicons, but not in existing ontologies, were also included in our anatomic and cell ontologies. For example, tracheal submucosa (SNOMEDCT/4419000) and telocyte (MeSH/ D000067170) were not found in any existing ontology.

 Identification and harmonization of common, analogous, and unique terminology for human and mouse lung enables comparative data linkage and molecular analyses between the two species, serving as a unique resource for the LungMAP and the broader research community.

 Cell Ontology for Mouse Lung Maturation (LUNGMAP-M-CELL), available athttps://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/LUNGMAP_M_CELL


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q90939015)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q90939015)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q90939015&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/S13326-019-0209-1)  
