
Application of Large Electronic Medical Database for Detecting Undiagnosed Patients in the General Population
=============================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q90961362]  
  
Publication date : 01 of October, 2019  

# Highlights
However, at
present, the exact methodology to efficiently utilize compiled large databases in an electronic format for the process
of diagnosis and therapeutic decisions has not been established yet


n addition to supporting clinicians in reaching a correct diagnosis, another expected clinical application of
computer technology is to suggest and advise clinicians on
their possible oversight in cases of patients with undiagnosed diseases based on a compiled electronic format database that comprehensively contains the individual’s background, symptoms, and findings from previously-performed
diagnostic examinations (Fig. 1B). This second application
is much more realistic, harmless, and an easier way of AI
application than the first because computers are better at
handling binary data or numerical data than language data
or narrative data (Hashimoto et al. 2018). In this study, we
attempted the above-mentioned second application, by
using a large national medical record database to detect
patients in a community population with a specific undiagnosed chronic disease.

--> Also important ethical implications

In this study, we successfully detected one patient with
EGJOO from the massive community population by utilizing a uniform national receipt database. Judging from the
low prevalence of EGJOO in the healthy population, the
computerized extraction algorithm developed in this study
can be highly efficient and powerful for detecting overlooked patients in the community population.

In conclusion, we successfully extracted one patient
with EGJOO from the community population by utilizing a
computerized extraction algorithm based on a national
receipt database. 

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q90961362)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q90961362)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q90961362&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1620/TJEM.249.113)  
