
The Signaling Pathways Project, an integrated 'omics knowledgebase for mammalian cellular signaling pathways
============================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91044884]  
  
Publication date : 31 of October, 2019  

# Highlights

 Here, we designed a web knowledgebase, the Signaling Pathways Project (SPP), which incorporates community classifications of signaling pathway nodes (receptors, enzymes, transcription factors and co-nodes) and their cognate bioactive small molecules. We then mapped over 10,000 public transcriptomic or cistromic experiments to their pathway node or biosample of study.

We previously described our efforts to biocurate transcriptomic datasets involving genetic or small molecule manipulation of nuclear receptors5. Here we describe here a novel and distinct web knowledgebase, the Signaling Pathways Project (SPP), that enhances the FAIR status of public cell signaling ‘omics datasets along three dimensions.

The SPP query interface, Ominer, allows a user to specify single gene target, Gene Ontology (GO) term or custom gene list in the “Gene(s) of Interest” drop-down, and to dial in additional node and biosample regulatory parameters in subsequent drop-down menus as required (Fig. 3a)

Consensome queries (see Supplementary Information Subsection 1E for a walk-through) are designed for users unfamiliar with a particular signaling node family who are seeking evidence for targets that have close regulatory relationships with members of that family.

For knowledgebase design purposes, we defined a dataset as a collection of individual experiments encompassed by a specific GEO series (GSE, for transcriptomic datasets) or SRA Project (SRP, for ChIP-Seq datasets).
Transcriptomic datasets

We previously described our efforts to biocurate Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) transcriptomic datasets pertinent to nuclear receptor signaling as part of the Nuclear Receptor Signaling Atlas5.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91044884)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91044884)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91044884/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91044884&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41597-019-0193-4)  
