
The Monarch Initiative in 2019: an integrative data and analytic platform connecting phenotypes to genotypes across species
===========================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91179320]  

# Highlights

The Monarch Initiative (https://monarchinitiative.org) integrates information on genes, variants, genotypes, phenotypes and diseases in a variety of species, and allows powerful ontology-based search.

Launched in 2015, Monarch has grown with regards to data(new organisms, more sources, better modeling); new API and standards; ontologies (new Mondo unified disease ontology, improvements to ontologies such as HPO and uPheno); user interface (a redesigned website); and community development.

Members of the Monarch Initiative and collaborators have developed resources such as the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO); harmonized phenotype ontologies in the Unified Phenotype Ontology (uPheno)

HPO (https: //hpo.jax.org), a flagship of Monarch, is a standardized vocabulary of phenotypic abnormalities associated with over 7000 diseases.

the Mammalian Phenotype (MP) ontology is used by the Mouse Genome Informatics resource (MGI) to annotate mouse phenotypes, HPO by Monarch for human phenotypes and the Drosophila Phenotype Ontology by FlyBase for Drosophila Phenotypes. 

The Zebrafish Information Network (ZFIN) (10) uses a different approach, describing zebrafish phenotypes with terms from reference ontologies such as the Phenotype And Trait Ontology (PATO; http://www.obofoundry.org/ontology/pato) and the Gene Ontology (GO) (11). 

To enable cross-species querying of phenotypes we have developed an approach for integrating these ontologies based on logical definitions (12), called the Entity-Quality (EQ) approach.

‘bridging axioms’ that connect terms from different ontologies using equivalence or subsumption axioms (13)

Mondo combines disease information from sources such as OMIM (20), Orphanet (21) and NCIt (National Cancer Institute Thesaurus (22)), in order to leverage the strengths of each resource, including the neoplastic disease classification of NCIt, the rare disease coverage of Orphanet, the Mendelian cover- age of OMIM and the common disease coverage of other resources. The

Monarch developed the SEPIO ontology-based data modeling framework for representing evidence and provenance behind scientific assertions (http://obofoundry.org/ontology/sepio)

intermediate RDF data files, as well as all referenced ontologies, are unified with SciGraph (https:// github.com/SciGraph/SciGraph),
henceforth referred to as theMonarch knowledge graph.

In order to simplify programmatic access to Monarch’sresourceswe developed Ontobio, a librarywritten in Python and designed for work with ontologies and ontology associations. 
It supports a wide range of functionalities such as (i) parsing and using ontologies; (ii) an object model for work- ing with ontologies and their metadata elements; (iii) an API for performing graph operations traversing through an ontology; (iv) ways to access associations from Monarch’s knowledge graph; (v) ways to access functional annotations from the Gene Ontology; (vi) tools for performing enrich- ment analyses with virtually any ontology and associations for that ontology; and (vii) a command-line interface. Ontobio is freely available at https://github.com/biolink/ontobio.

In addition to improving the data model and the ontologies, these collabo- rative workshops have inspired new collaborations and in- creased general knowledge about bio-ontologies.


The Monarch Initiative has brought together 31 data resources and made a real difference in the lives of patients (49). Monarch has been an important part of projects like GA4GH and the NCATS Translator. Future work will in- clude development of HCLS-Compliant metadata, incor- poration ofadditional datasets, further development of on- tologies and extension ofthe data model to include environ- mental exposures. While the Monarch Initiative will con- tinue to focus onhuman disease, data acquisition and model development, it will expand its scope toward a higher diversity of species and domain expert contributions.

A beta version of the updated user interface (UI) is available at https://beta.monarchinitiative.org. 
The new UI is a single page application, written in VueJS, that relies on various backend services, primar- ily our new API (described above), to retrieve and dis- play the data. 
The Monarch database integrates information from 31 phenotype-related resources (https://beta. monarchinitiative.org/about/data-sources), allowing users to establish connections among biological entities of inter- est, such as genes, genotypes, gene variants (including SNPs, SNVs, QTLs, CNVs), models (including cell lines, animal strains, species, breeds, as well as targeted mutants), pathways, orthologs, phenotypes and publications.

<!-- Text annotator is a bit buggy -->

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91179320)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91179320)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91179320/P921%3BP4510)  
