
Neuronal cell types in the fly: single-cell anatomy meets single-cell genomics
==============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91291960]  
  
Publication date : 28 of January, 2019  

# Highlights

- A neuronal type is a testable hypothesis: similarity indicates functional equivalency.

- Single-cell transcriptomics produces cell-atlases with consistent clusters.

- Specific genetic lines bridge transcriptomic clusters to morphological types.

- Genetic driver lines, connectomics and transcriptomics make a full Drosophila neuronal parts list imminent.

At around 150 000 neurons, the adult Drosophila melanogaster central nervous system is one of the largest species, for which a complete cellular catalogue is imminent

Initial studies comparing morphological and transcriptomic definitions of neuronal type suggest that these are highly consistent, but there is much to do to match these approaches brain-wide. Matched single-cell transcriptomic and morphological data provide an effective reference point to integrate other data types, including connectomics data.

We argue that formalised approaches to defining neuronal type are essential as we are faced with increasingly complete parts lists for nervous systems.


Even at the scale of Drosophila melanogaster, there may be 135 000 neurons in the adult
brain, around 20 000 in the adult ventral nervous system (VNS) (Dickmann and Huan, personal communication) and 10–12 000 in the larval central nervous system
[1]

As with species, neuronal types are ultimately the reproducible product of definable genomic regulatory programs active during development. We could approximate this developmental ‘aim’ as the average of the cell phenotypes that it produces — to borrow a philosophical idea, its ‘Platonic form’.


Registered to different templates, can
be quantitatively compared and co-visualised, even between sexes and species, by bridging registrations [27]. NBLAST, or other algorithms, can
be used to compare query neurons to annotated libraries to assign identities, or cluster neurons to discover groups and build annotations
(Figure 2). Here, we co-cluster olfactory projection neurons reconstructed from EM data [8] with annotated light-level FlyCircuit neurons [14] in
order to assign the EM neurons a neuronal type identity, that comes with a wealth of associated information from the literature (a subset shown).


Although in phylogeny, reproductive isolation is a
hypothesis that can sometimes be tested, it is generally
a thought experiment that calibrates definitions based on
other measures, for example, genomic sequence similarity. A similar hypothesis for neuroscience might be that:

Neurons of a type can be consistently identified across individuals but not consistently subdivided within individuals.

Although challenging, cell typing has the benefit of reducing dimensionality, by mapping many neurons onto a smaller number
to units that are developmentally specified or functionally meaningful. This simplifies reasoning about brain architecture and development and facilitates scientific communication.


In the fly morphological cell types currently represent the most extensive set of annotated cell types, and also provide a convenient bridge between transcriptome and connectome.
Insect neurons typically have highly reproducible spatial locations (e.g. Ref. [26])

. It has been suggested that cell body fascicles form a natural grouping system amenable to exhaustive identification by quantitative methods
[35], not least because as a lineage-proxy they may indicate common gene expression [36]. For the same reasons, internal tracts have been extremely helpful in delineating olfactory projection neuron types across insects [37].

. It has been suggested that cellbody fascicles form a natural grouping system amenable
to exhaustive identification by quantitative methods [35], not least because as a lineage-proxy they may indicate common gene expression [36]. For the same reasons, internal tracts have been extremely helpful in delineating olfactory projection neuron types across insects [37].


Neurons from the cell-atlases can already be grouped by
proxies for neurotransmitter expression. It might be possible that some types express multiple fast-acting transmitters, and it seems that some neuropeptidergic or
aminergic expression correlates/anti-correlates with certain fast-transmitters [11
]. In depth analysis of receptor
expression may reveal the sign of neuronal connections,
while expression of for example voltage-gated ion channels may reveal aspects of their electrical properties. This
provides powerful information about circuit function
when linked to morphologies (e.g. Ref. [56]), and especially, to connectomes [22].


A central brain type on average may constitute only 5 neurons per hemisphere, with many types constituting single cells and a few, likeKenyon cells, hundreds.

14.

Costa M, Manton JD, Ostrovsky AD, Prohaska S, Jefferis GSXE:
NBLAST: rapid, sensitive comparison of neuronal structure
and construction of neuron family databases. Neuron 2016,
91:293-311.
Thie study introduces NBLAST, an efficient, sensitive algorithm for neuronal morphology comparison. Tools are available in R to use NBLAST
with neuronal skeletons and objects extracted from image data (https://github.com/jefferislab/nat.nblast), based on the ‘nat’ ecosystem (https://
github.com/jefferis/nat), which also includes tools to bridge between template brains (https://github.com/jefferislab/nat.templatebrains). A
web application is also available for the more casual user (http://flybrain.mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk/si/nblast/www/nblast_online/). Some reregistered FlyCircuit morphologies [6] and type annotations have been
made available (https://github.com/jefferis/flycircuit).

D. melanogaster is post-genomic. In the next few years, it will be post-connectomic and post-transcriptomic at cellular resolution. It is, therefore, one of very few systems,in which comprehensive brain-wide single-cell transcriptomics and morphological analyses can meet. Minimally,
we might expect all of its neuronal types to become as well defined as those of the mammalian retina (100
types) [12] or Ciona intestinalis (52) [69], and eventually C.elegans (118) [70].

For these species, morphological classification [69,71,72] matches gene expression and/orphysiology well [70,73,74]. Gene expression programs[16], and even certain morphologies can be recognisedacross related species [75,76].

Of course, defining neuronal types is only the beginning:
ultimately, we hope to make functional predictions based
on a synthesis of this information.

We thank D. Osumi-Sutherland for cell type queries of http://virtualflybrain.org,


scRNA-seq has identified up to 200 transcriptomic types
within mammalian cortex [12] (Mus musculus, cortex
170 mm3
). Recent work examined two diverse cortical
subvolumes, finding 133 transcriptomic types, of which
79 were shared [77]. Perhaps most comparably to the
cortex, the mushroom body lobes (volume 1.4  104
mm3
) only contain nine intrinsic and 42 extrinsic known
types [41,78]; however, estimates for regions like the
lateral horn (1  104 mm3
) are already >200 [13
]. While
it is early days for this field, these initial mammalian
estimates suggest that the mean number of cells per type
may be much higher than in fly. Of course, it is possible —
indeed quite likely — that larger studies will identify
more cortical neuronal types and that subcortical brain
areas may have a significantly higher density of neuronal
types



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91291960)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91291960)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91291960&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CONB.2018.12.012)  
