
Integrative single-cell analysis
================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91272514]  
  
Publication date : 01 of May, 2019  

# Highlights

Integrated analysis can discover relationships across cellular modalities, learn a holistic 
representation of the cell state, and enable the pooling of data sets produced across individuals 
and technologies.

More recently, there has been considerable interest in the simultaneous profiling of multiple types of molecule within a single cell (multimodal profiling) to build a much more comprehensive molecular view of the cell.

CRISPR–Cas9, and these barcodes can subsequently be transcribed into a polyadenylated mRNA and detected using conventional scRNA-seq. The DNA sequence differences between lineage barcodes from individual cells can then be used to construct a lineage tree for the tissue or organism.


 Tirosh et al.65 inferred copy number variants in melanoma tumours directly from scRNA-seq data by averaging the expression values of 100-gene stretches over the genome, revealing common patterns of aneuploidy in the tumour cells.

 Notably, key information on transcript isoforms can be obtained from scRNA-seq data, even from methods that capture only the 3ʹ end of gene transcripts70, and intron retention data can provide a surprising amount of information to complement transcript abundance measurements.


So far, two related methods have been developed that are capable of projecting cells onto an existing data set to facilitate the transfer of cell labels: scmap-cell and scmap-cluster


Notably, supervised annotation may have substantially greater power to resolve cell types than unsupervised clustering does, particularly as the size, depth and coverage of reference data sets continue to grow.

By studying the relationships between multimodal data types within single cells, we can begin to uncover the underlying basis for cellular functions and infer causal relationships between modalities. A major outstanding scientific and philosophical question in biology is ‘what is a cell type?’ If there is an answer to this question, it will be found through a nuanced analysis of single cells, taking into account different modalities and conditions, just as the age-old question of ‘what is a gene?’ must be answered through the comparative analysis of DNA sequences across species and a multimodal biochemical analysis.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91272514)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91272514)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91272514/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91272514&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41576-019-0093-7)  
