
Single-cell profiling identifies myeloid cell subsets with distinct fates during neuroinflammation
==================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91210236]  

# Highlights

RATIONALE: An important step for the initiation of EAE and multiple sclerosis (MS) is
the infiltration of the CNS by encephalitogenic
T cells, which potentially become reactivated
by encountering their self-cognate antigens
presented at the brain interfaces. Myeloid cells
have been shown to play a critical role in antigen
presentation. Consequently, their transcriptomic
profile and dynamics during neuroinflammation are crucial for understanding neuroinflammatory pathology.


Assemble a transcriptional atlas comprising 3461
immune cells, identified as homeostatic (“h”)
or disease-associated (“da”) myeloid subsets

An evaluation of microglial expansion by using Cx3cr1CreER:R26Confetti mice revealed their clonal expansion during neuroinflammation

populations during neuroinflammation. Although CNS-resident
macrophages quickly generated contextdependent subsets during disease, their
role as APCs was irrelevant for the initiation of pathology. DCs and monocytederived cells, highly diverse during EAE,
remain the major players in antigen presentation


Under steady-state conditions, the central
nervous system (CNS) hosts a heterogeneous population of myeloid cells, including
parenchymalmicrogliaand non–parenchymal
perivascular (pvMF), meningeal (mMF),
and choroid plexus macrophages (cpMF), which
are collectively called CNS-associated macrophages
(CAMs) (1–3)

--> Nice little taxonomy for Wikidata

In order to analyze the diversity of hematopoietic
cells during neuroinflammation on a single-cell
level, we dissected several CNS compartments.
Cells from the leptomeninges, choroid plexus,
perivascular space, parenchyma, and blood from
naïve and MOG35-55–immunized mice were isolated and subjected to high-throughput scRNAseq accompanied with unbiased clustering (Fig. 1).


Profiling of all CAM populations—including individual mMF, pvMF, and cpMF from healthy
mice—identified the presence of three subsets
of CAMs, designated hCAM1, hCAM2, and hCAM3
(fig. S2, A to D), which expressed not only Mrc1
but also Ms4a7, Pf4, Stab1, Cbr2, and Cd163
(fig. S2E). Fcrls, which was previously described
to be microglia-specific (25, 26), was also detectable in all hCAM subsets.

We then used a combination of high-throughput
scRNA-seq profiling and Cx3cr1CreERT2-based
fate mapping to identify disease-induced subsets of MCs and DCs that could contribute to
EAE pathogenesis (20, 33–35).

 To directly monitor interactions between
HSC-derived myelomonocytic cells and T cells,
we next crossed Ccr2RFP/WT mice to Cd2GFP
T cell reporter mice (Fig. 7I). Although pDCs
expressed almost no RFP, ~30% of cDC1 and
cDC2 were targeted in this line, which is in
agreement with recent findings (


This study provides an unbiased view of the
transcriptional landscapes of CNS-resident and
circulating myeloid cells during homeostasis
and CNS autoimmunity. We found that homeostatic cell-specific profiles are rather uniform
throughout the various analyzed CNS regions,
whereas a considerable compartment- and disease stage–specific myeloid subtype specification with high plasticity emerges during the
development and maintenance of neuroinflammatory pathology


hat drive CNS pathology by amplifying T cell
responses via MHC class II in EAE remains unclear. One possible candidate subset comprises
DCs that represent the intersection of the innate
and adaptive immune systems (57). This idea is
supported by the fact that CD11c-driven transgenic
overexpression of MHC class II facilitates EAE
pathogenesis (20). However, this previous approach
did not exclude the potential contribution of MHC
class II on CD11c+ MG or CAMs during disease. We
observed the presence of disease-specific CD209+
and MerTK+ MCs and disease-associated DCs
mostly in the choroid plexus, leptomeninges, and,
to a lesser extent, the perivascular space. Thus,
we identified these locations as putative entry
sites for MHC class II–dependent T cells.

The role of microglia during MS/EAE remains
controversial. For several decades, the activation
of microglia has been described during CNS inflammation and considered to be an initial
event in MS pathology (58). Even in early stages
of MS, activated microglial clusters (so-called
microglial nodules) are found in preactive lesions in the white matter of MS patients (59).
To gain further insights into the involvement of
activated microglia, several transgenic mouse
models have been developed. These suggested
major roles of microglia, including the expression of proinflammatory mediators and effector
molecules at the peak of disease (30, 60) and the
removal of debris, which allows proper remyelination during the recovery phase (49, 61). Furthermore, microglia are thought to contribute
to antigen-dependent T cell activation (58). However, selective gene-targeting experiments now
demonstrate that MHC class II–mediated T cell
priming by microglia is not critical for the induction or progression of EAE.

--> Maybe confusiong arises by the differecnes between experiments.

Thus, the identification of disease- and CNScompartment–specific myeloid subsets during
EAE should provide the basis for implementation
of therapeutic approaches, specific to previously
unidentified subsets, for neuroinflammatory
disorders. These should entail reduced risks
compared with the somewhat global immune
suppressive therapies currently administered to
a large number of MS patients

--> Super jump from mouse model to human disease!! Dangerous.
# Comments

# Tags
1.4.2. A focus on single-cell RNA sequencing


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91210236)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91210236)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91210236/P921%3BP4510)  
