
Molecular Classification and Comparative Taxonomics of Foveal and Peripheral Cells in Primate Retina
====================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91321664]  
  
Publication date : 31 of January, 2019  

# Highlights
•Macaque fovea and peripheral retina each contain >65 cell types
•Greater conservation of interneuron than ganglion cell types between macaque and mouse
•Cell-type- and region-specific expression of genes implicated in human blindness


We used 165,000 single-cell RNA-seq profiles to generate comprehensive cellular taxonomies of macaque fovea and peripheral retina

These important aspects of human retinal function and dysfunction cannot be satisfactorily studied in more accessible model organisms, including mice, because they lack a fovea.

To address these issues, we generated an atlas of >165,000 single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) profiles from the fovea and peripheral retina of adult crab-eating macaques (Macaca fascicularis

. We found a tight correspondence between mouse and macaque PRs, BCs, and ACs, but a divergence in RGC types.

To maximize our ability to distinguish cell types consistently, we first grouped cells into the six major retinal classes (RGCs, BCs, PRs, ACs, HCs, and non-neuronal cells)


Altogether, we distinguished 64 foveal (3 PR, 2 HC, 12 BC, 27 AC, 16 RGC, and 4 non-neuronal) and 71 peripheral (2 PR, 2 HC, 11 BC, 34 AC, 18 RGC, and 4 non-neuronal) clusters (Figures 1D–1I); all clusters were found in all animals (Figures S1G–S1I).

As noted below, a few clusters contain >1 cell type.

L., M. TSHB (L) and QPCT (M) label two distinct types of PRKCA+ BCs with distinct morphologies. Based on their abundance, TSHB+ cells are rod bipolars (RB) and QPCT+ cells could be DB5∗ (Table S2). The axon of DB5∗ was traced and is represented by a white dashed line. In contrast, PRKCA is a selective rod bipolar marker in mice (Shekhar et al., 2016).

<!-- Table S2 is an amazing table for integration with Wikidata!
It also contains   - 3.1.  Cell-type markers in Wikidata -->

N. A viral labeled BB cell is DOPEY2 positive. BB type has a distinguishable bifurcated dendritic morphology (Mariani, 1984).

Morphological studies have distinguished ∼18 RGC types in primate retina (Dacey, 2004, Masri et al., 2019). ON and OFF Midget RGCs (MGCs)—the smallest and most abundant—comprise ≥85% of foveal RGCs, larger ON and OFF parasol RGCs (PGCs) comprise ∼10%, small bistratified RGCs (SBCs) account for ∼5%, and ∼11 types with larger dendritic arbors account for the remaining ∼1%. MGCs and PGCs also account for a large majority of peripheral RGCs (Dacey, 2004).

We identified 18 peripheral and 16 foveal RGC clusters (Figure 1H). Based on their abundance, we tentatively identified a pair of clusters as ON and OFF MGCs (∼85% of RGCs in fovea and 83% in periphery) and a second pair as ON and OFF PGCs (11% in fovea and 4.8% in periphery

Tight Molecular Correspondence between Macaque and Mouse BC and AC Types
While the conservation of genes across species has been extensively studied, we know less about the extent to which cell types are conserved.

scRNA-seq enables systematic comparison of cell atlases across species by leveraging gene orthology (Marioni and Arendt, 2017). To exploit this opportunity, we adapted the multi-class classification framework used for fovea-periphery comparisons to compare macaque cells with those previously collected from mice (Macosko et al., 2015, Shekhar et al., 2016).

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91321664)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91321664)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91321664&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2019.01.004)  
