
Murine single-cell RNA-seq reveals cell-identity- and tissue-specific trajectories of aging
===========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91385655]  
  
Publication date : 21 of November, 2019  

# Highlights
Leveraging matrix factorization and optimal transport methods, we found that both cell identities and tissue environments exert influence on the trajectory and magnitude of aging, with cell identity influence predominating. These results suggest that aging manifests with unique directionality and magnitude across the diverse cell identities in mammals.

Additional lines of inquiry have aimed to address a classical question in aging biology: Do different tissues age in the same way? Transcriptomic analysis at the bulk tissue level revealed tissue-specific features of aging in several studies (Schumacher et al. 2008; Jonker et al. 2013; Ori et al. 2015; Benayoun et al. 2019).

Mammals contain a multitude of distinct cell types, each of which may be composed of multiple cell states. This combination of cell type and state together form a cell identity. Each of these cell identities shows specialized functions. In the mouse alone, recent cell atlas efforts have revealed more than 100 cell types (Han et al. 2018; The Tabula Muris Consortium 2018). These surveys have cataloged diverse murine cell identities, but the plasticity of these identities and their contributions to tissue- and organism-level pathology remain unknown.

scRNA-seq reveals that nonimmune cell-type proportions are preserved with age.

We determined cell type and state identity by leveraging annotations provided in the Tabula Muris (The Tabula Muris Consortium 2018) following the “cell ontology” structure (Bakken et al. 2017).
To infer cell types, we trained a neural network classifier to predict cell ontology classes given single-cell RNA-seq mRNA abundance profiles (Supplemental Methods). As a training set, we used the Tabula Muris compendium, which provides expert cell type annotations in the mouse (The Tabula Muris Consortium 2018). In addition to these annotations, we manually added cell state annotations to the Tabula Muris data to provide a level of granularity below cell ontology classes (Supplemental Fig. S1). 


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91385655)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91385655)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91385655&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/GR.253880.119)  
