
Unsupervised word embeddings capture latent knowledge from materials science literature
=======================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91595456]  
  
Publication date : 03 of July, 2019  

# Highlights

Here we show that materials science knowledge present in the published literature can be efficiently encoded as information-dense word embeddings11–13(vector representations of words) without human labelling or supervision. Without any explicit insertion of chemical knowledge, these embeddings capture complex materials science concepts such as the underlying structure of the periodic table and structure–property relationships in materials. 

. We then applied the skip-gram variation of Word2vec, which is trained to predict context words that appear in the proximity of the target word as a means to learn the 200-dimensional embedding of that target word, to our text corpus (Fig. 1a)

ons with available computational data. Specifically, we identified com-pounds mentioned in our text corpus more than three times that are also present in a dataset16 that reports the thermoelectric power factors (an important component of the overall thermoelectric figure of merit, zT)of approximately 48,000 compounds calculated using density func-tional theory (DFT)17,1

We note that in contrast to supervised methods, our embeddings are based only on the text corpus and are not trained or modified in any manner using the DFT data.
--> Roots

Finally, we tested whether our model—if trained at various points in the past—would have correctly predicted thermoelectric materials reported later in the literature. Specifically, we generated 18 different ‘historical’ text corpora consisting only of abstracts published before cutoff years between 2001 and 2018

Fig. 2 | Prediction of new thermoelectric materials.a, A ranking of thermoelectric materials can be produced using cosine similarities of material embeddings with the embedding of the word ‘thermoelectric’. Highly ranked materials that have not yet been studied for thermoelectric applications (do not appear in the same abstracts as words ‘ZT’, ‘zT’, ‘seebeck’, ‘thermoelectric’, ‘thermoelectrics’, ‘thermoelectrical’, ‘thermoelectricity’, ‘thermoelectrically’ or ‘thermopower’) are considered to be predictions that can be tested in the future.

 # Comments

The figures of this paper are so simple and so beautiful. Piece of art.

## Tags
1.1.1. Literature Based Discovery, hidden knowledge and text-mining

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91595456)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91595456)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91595456/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91595456&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-019-1335-8)  
