
Accurate estimation of cell-type composition from gene expression data
======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91665384]  

# Highlights

To most effectively extract information from bulk data given the new knowledge gained from single-cell methods, we have developed a novel algorithm to estimate the cell-type composition of bulk data from a single-cell RNA-seq-derived cell-type signature.

As the overall signature gener- ated from these methods only measures the average behavior, it is often the case that changes in gene expression only reflect changes in cell-type composition, rather than fundamental changes in cell states1

However, existing methods have a number of important lim-
itations. Most importantly, the underlying cell-type signatures must be known in advance. Most studies assume that such sig- natures can be identified from the bulk transcriptomic profiling of purified cell types. The success of cell-type purification relies heavily on the knowledge of specific markers as well as the ability to isolate cells from surrounding tissues. Moreover, it is now known that even the ‘purified’ cells may still contain significant cellular heterogeneity10.


Much like recent studies16,17, we use single-cell RNA-seq data to extract cell-type-specific gene expression signatures. Simply, the cell types are identified by clustering analysis. For each cell type, marker genes are identified by differential expression analysis, after which gene expression levels for each of these genes are averaged across all cells asso- ciated with the cell type. This results in a gene by cell-type sig- nature matrix, which is denoted by S (see Methods section for details).

--> In this case, the cell-type-signature matrix is kind of a definition matrix, as the deconvolution use this matrix to represent the prototypical cells that are "counted" in deconvolution.

Of note, we make the commonly used simplifying assumption that the total amount of RNA is approximately equal in each cell. If this is not true, the estimated contribution of each cell type may deviate from the actual cell abundance.

Marker genes were then chosen to match the genes used in the immune-cell-specific signature from CIBERSORT9

Cellular heterogeneity must be taken into account when com- paring gene expression data from bulk samples. As large efforts are under way to thoroughly characterize cell types of different organisms through single-cell analyses26, we are facing a new opportunity to systematically quantify cell-type composition using the detected cell-type signatures.

we also recognize the danger of detecting irrelevant cell types, which is especially acute when many irrelevant cell types are included in the signature. Cell types from different tissues may share similar functions and therefore may be difficult to differentiate due to high collinearity. To minimize this risk, we advise that after a general deconvolution with a broad signature, irrelevant cell types be removed from the signature matrix to build a more specific signature matrix from only the most appropriate single-cell data sets.
\

## Methods:

The single-cell data cell-type labels shown in Yan et al. Figure 5a19 were obtained from the authors upon request, and these were used to generate the signature matrix. The bulk data is quantified in terms of FPKM values.
Schelker


s. A signature matrix was built using all cells, using the clusters found by DBSCAN in Schelker et al.17, and using the genes from the CIBERSORT immune-cell signature9. Twenty-seven patient-specific simulated bulk data sets were built by summing up gene expression values of signature genes across all cell types, for each patient.
Modified


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91665384)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91665384)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91665384/P921%3BP4510)  
