
Reactome and ORCID-fine-grained credit attribution for community curation
=========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91699018]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2019  

# Highlights

In cases where published information needed to annotate a reaction fully is not available, the resulting event is clearly marked as a ‘Black box’ reaction. The resulting pathway representation is then reviewed internally by a senior curator. Next, we recruit a second external domain expert, from a different group, as a reviewer, who provides major or minor comments and corrections, triggering an update of the pathway representation. Once all three key people (author, curator, and reviewer (contributors)) are satisfied, the pathway is released in the next Reactome quarterly release. 

Searchability: contributor names are now fully searchable in the standard Reactome web interface

ii) ORCID claiming: where the contributor has provided an ORCID identifier, the top of the detailed contribution page (Figure 2) shows a link that allows the contributor to validate themselves using the ORCID API. After validation, the details page provides additional buttons to claim, at a single click, all their Reactome contributions to their ORCID profile, or provide a more fine-grained selection of the Reactome contributions they would like to claim to their ORCID profile.

n an experiment to increase Reactome user engagement and contribution, we have added a specific ‘Collaboration’ section to the Reactome ‘Community’ web pages (Figure 3). Here, we list pathways which have passed the internal review, but still require an external review to be ready for release.

In the context of the development of community standards for data citation (6), as well as nascent credit attribution and impact metrics for non-manuscript scientific output like datasets (12), we hope to contribute a small step towards a more multidimensional view of scientific productivity, where a scientist is more than their h-index.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91699018)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91699018)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91699018&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/DATABASE/BAZ123)  
