
A Literature-Based Knowledge Graph Embedding Method for Identifying Drug Repurposing Opportunities in Rare Diseases
===================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91663841]  
  
Publication date : 01 of January, 2020  

# Highlights

 GNBR is a large, heterogeneous knowledge graph comprising drug, disease, and gene (or protein) entities linked by a small set of semantic themes derived from the abstracts of biomedical literature. 

 We apply a knowledge graph embedding method that explicitly models the uncertainty associated with literature-derived relationships and uses link prediction to generate drug repurposing hypotheses. 

In this work, we first prioritize rare diseases based on their potential for drug repurposing, accounting for the availability of data and the current state of treatment need. 


We adopt an uncertain knowledge graph embedding method,11 which takes advantage of the support scores in GNBR (i.e. the confidence of the relationship) in order to learn embedding vectors for all nodes and themes

For example, blocks consisting of {“causal mutations” (U), “polymorphisms alter risk” (Y), “mutations affecting disease course” (Ud)} and {“decreased expression” (E-), “antagonism” (A-), “inhibition” (N)} represent important classes of gene-disease and drug-gene relationships, respectively.

Outside of the Dr-Dz group, we see that among Dz-G themes, three stand out as quite similar to the Dr-Dz themes, suggesting a higher utility in our drug repurposing model (excluding J, which also belongs to the Dr-Dz group): “possible therapeutic effect” (Te), “diagnostic biomarkers” (Md), and “overexpression in disease” (X). Surprisingly, “Drug targets” (D) appears to be less related to treatment, suggesting that the literature references in this category are less specific (e.g. stating that a gene can be targeted without mentioning any actual drug).


This work originally began as a class project for BIOMEDIN 212, “Introduction to Biomedical Informatics Research Methodology”, at Stanford University.

--> Interesting.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91663841)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91663841)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91663841&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
