
An Airway Protection Program Revealed by Sweeping Genetic Control of Vagal Afferents
====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91662280]  
  
Publication date : 02 of April, 2020  

# Highlights

Rare P2RY1 sensory neurons guard the airways by engaging an airway defense program
•
P2RY1 neurons innervate the laryngeal epithelium and appose laryngeal taste buds
•
Epithelial cells detect laryngeal water/acid and communicate to P2RY1 neurons via ATP

 throat-innervating neuron

ptogenetic activation of vagal P2RY1 neurons evokes a coordinated airway defense program—apnea, vocal fold adduction, swallowing, and expiratory reflexes.

Anatomical mapping revealed numerous laryngeal terminal types, with P2RY1 neurons forming corpuscular endings that appose laryngeal taste buds. 

Here, we used information and genetic tools resulting from a comprehensive survey of vagal sensory neuron diversity to gain insights into physiological mechanisms underlying airway defense.

The upper airways are densely innervated by the vagus nerve through the superior laryngeal (SLN) and recurrent laryngeal (RLN) nerve branches.


These studies highlighted the general importance of neuronal feedback for airway protection, but did not distinguish the contributions of various vagal neuron subtypes or the molecular mechanisms they employ.


Single-cell RNA sequencing revealed a remarkable diversity of vagal afferents, and Cre mice were obtained for genetic control over most neuron subtypes individually or in small clusters, enabling links between cell identity, terminal morphology, sensory response, and physiological function. Cell-type-specific optogenetics revealed that rare vagal P2RY1 neurons (∼100 per mouse) elicit a suite of airway protective responses including expiratory reflexes, vocal fold adduction, apnea, and fictive swallow. Moreover, ablation of vagal P2RY1 neurons impairs defensive responses to laryngeal challenges from acid and water, but not salt or force.

Figure 2 - An Atlas of Sensory Neuron Subtypes from Vagal and Glossopharyngeal Nerves

 27 cell clusters, representing 79% of NJP sensory neurons (19,756/25,117), were derived from nodose and inferior petrosal ganglia based on expression of Phox2b, a marker for epibranchial placode-derived sensory neurons

. Single-cell transcriptome data of vagal/glossopharyngeal sensory neurons are publicly available (GEO: GSE145216).

The 37 classes of NJP sensory neurons may differ with regard to organ-targeting pattern, response property, and/or physiological function. 
Some vagal P2RY1 neurons also innervate the lung, with arbors that appose clusters of lung secretory cells termed neuroepithelial bodies (Chang et al., 2015).

 By using this large panel of Cre lines, and treating each Cre line as an independent linear variable, we reasoned that it could be possible to deduce the functions of particular transcriptome-defined sensory neurons.

 Light-induced stimulation of vagal P2RY1 neurons evoked frequent pharyngeal swallowing and expiratory reflexes

 Based on prior RNA in situ hybridization analysis, P2ry1 is expressed in 11.6% of NJP sensory neurons, or ∼250 neurons per ganglion (Chang et al., 2015). 
Single-cell sequencing of NP19 neurons revealed expression of Phox2b, indicating placodal origin, signature genes that include P2ry1, Slc18a3, Gm2990, Runx3, and Pappa2 (Figure S3C), but not Trpa1 or Trpv1, which are implicated in irritant responses.

Figure 6P2RY1 Neurons Innervate Laryngeal Taste Buds
<!-- Beautiful figure -->

Moreover, CALB1, P2RY1, NPY1R, and NPY2R neurons formed different terminal types in laryngeal epithelium (Figure 6D).

PIEZO2 fibers encircled laryngeal mucosal glands, and also ramified within intrinsic laryngeal muscles, while GABRA1 neurons displayed large, isolated, and branched terminals in the trachealis muscle.

Interestingly, P2RY1 neuron corpuscles directly apposed laryngeal taste buds, as visualized by immunohistochemistry for the taste cell marker KRT8 (Figures 6F and 6G)

hese findings raise the possibility that upstream sentinel cells first detect water and/or acid in the larynx, and relay information to P2RY1 neurons through specific neurotransmitters. We next sought to test this model by both stimulating and blocking epithelial cell-to-neuron communication.

Each mouse NJP ganglion is small, with ∼2,300 neurons, yet rich in diversity, with ∼37 molecularly distinct sensory neuron subtypes. This cellular diversity is presumably needed as the vagus nerve innervates vast terrain, projecting to many internal organs within the body, and detects an assortment of sensory cues. Our findings also suggest that a small number of vagal sensory neurons may be sufficient to mediate a particular physiological function; for example, there are only ∼50 NP19 neurons in each ganglion devoted to an aspect of airway defense



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91662280)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91662280)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91662280&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2020.03.004)  
