
scSLAM-seq reveals core features of transcription dynamics in single cells
==========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91776830]  
  
Publication date : 10 of July, 2019  

# Highlights

We use scSLAM-seq to study the onset of infection with lytic cytomegalovirus in single mouse fibroblasts. The cell-cycle state and dose of infection deduced from old RNA enable dose–response analysis based on new RNA. scSLAM-seq thereby both visualizes and explains differences in transcriptional activity at the single-cell level. 

We applied the SLAM-seq technique to resolve the onset of lytic mouse cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection at the single-cell level.

b, PCA computed on regulated genes (see Extended Data Fig. 2c) with RNA velocities indicated by arrows for the scSLAM-seq (left; uninfected, n = 2 replicates, 43 cells; infected, n = 2 replicates, 44 cells) or the 10x (right; uninfected, n = 2 replicates, 793 cells; infected, n = 2 replicates, 353 cells) data

A fundamental question in virology is why the infection of one cell results in extensive lytic virus replication whereas the infection of a second cell does not. At 2 h.p.i., CMV infection in most cells has already progressed from the ‘immediate-early’ (restricted to a few genes) to the ‘early’ phase of infection, in which most viral genes are already transcribed. Although most viral transcripts in all cells were new, we also observed substantial amounts of old RNAs of some viral genes (Extended Data Fig. 4). This represents virion-associated RNA that is delivered to the infected cell by the incoming virus particles



# Comments

## Tags
- 1.4.2.1. Wet-lab methods and their differences
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91776830)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91776830)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91776830/P921%3BP4510)  
