
A conserved dendritic-cell regulatory program limits antitumour immunity
========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91739840]  
  
Publication date : 25 of March, 2020  

# Highlights

Conventional type 1 dendritic cells (DC1s) control the response to checkpoint blockade in preclinical models and are associated with better overall survival in patients with cancer,

ere, using single-cell RNA sequencing in human and mouse non-small-cell lung cancers, we identify a cluster of dendritic cells (DCs) that we name ‘mature DCs enriched in immunoregulatory molecules’ (mregDCs), 

Differential gene expression between mregDC1s versus mregDC2s in naive lungs.

he use of CITE-seq revealed that subsets of both DC1 (XCR1+ CD103+) and DC2 (XCR1– CD103– CD11b+) expressed the mregDC signature, suggesting that both DC1 and DC2 can differ-entiate into mregDCs (Fig. 1e, f).

. Similarly, markers of the mregDC gene module were upregulated in blue fluorescent protein (BFP)-expressing DC1s that populated B16–BFP/OVA lung metastases (Extended Data Fig. 2g).


As unbiased clustering of transcripts did not identify distinct mregDC1 and mregDC2 clusters, we used a biased approach to detect cells expressing DC1 or DC2 marker genes within the mregDC cluster. Stratifying mregDCs by DC1 and DC2 gene scores and comparing these scores with the expression of CITE-seq markers showed that mregDCs that stained positively for CD103 versus CD11b were weakly stratified, whereas DC1s and DC2s were separated into two distinct populations—further demonstrating how the transcriptional programs of these two lineages largely converge upon differentiation into mregDCs (Extended Data Fig. 1g).


 assess whether mregDCs were present in human tissues, we ana-lysed immune cells from tumour and non-involved lung tissues of 35 patients with NSCLC by scRNA-seq. Unsupervised clustering identi-fied a DC1 cluster expressing CLEC9A, XCR1 and IRF8 and a DC2 cluster expressing CD1C and FCER1A (Fig. 4a). Similar to our results in mice, we also identified a human mregDC cluster that expressed the maturation markers CCR7, CD40, RELB and CD83 and the regulatory molecules CD274, CD200, FA S and ALDH1A2, as well as low levels of TLR signal-ling genes and increased levels of migratory genes (Fig. 4a, b).

 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91739840)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91739840)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91739840/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91739840&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-020-2134-Y)  
