
A single-cell molecular map of mouse gastrulation and early organogenesis
=========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91763038]  
  
Publication date : 20 of February, 2019  

# Highlights

. Here we report the transcriptional profiles of 116,312 single cells from mouse embryos collected at nine sequential time points ranging from 6.5 to 8.5 days post-fertilization. 

Furthermore, we use single-cell profiling to show that Tal1−/− chimeric embryos display defects in early mesoderm diversification,

Our dataset thus captures Theiler stages (TS) 9, TS10, TS11, and TS12, which are enriched in the pre-streak to early streak, mid-streak to late-streak, neural plate, and headfold to somitogenesis stages, respectively.

Our atlas can be explored via the interactive website: https://marionilab.cruk.cam.ac.uk/MouseGastrulation2018/

d, Fraction of cell type per time point, displaying a progressive increase in cell-type complexity throughout our sampling.

--> Cool image

 Hindgut cells were also divided into two distinct clusters, hindgut 1 and hindgut 2, with significantly higher expression of the X chromosome genes Trap1a and Rhox5 in hindgut 

Of note, the hindgut 1-specific genes Trap1a and Rhox5 were also expressed in ExE endoderm and ExE ectoderm, in keeping with the extra-embryonic origin of the hindgut 1 cluster 

. The second wave (yolk-sac-definitive) starts with the emergence of erythro-myeloid progenitors (EMPs) from yolk-sac haemogenic endothelium. 

. Consistent with this, cells in our myeloid cell population expressed Ptprc (encoding CD45), Kit, Csf1r, and Fcgr3(encoding CD16),which were previously reported to be markers of the E8.5 EMP-like population that gives rise to microglial macrophages20,28

b, UMAP plots of chimaera cells (n= 25,078 wild type (WT); n= 26,326 Ta l 1−/−). Points are coloured and numbered according to their computationally assigned cell type, as in Fig. 1. Numbers and legend are only specified for those cell types that are clearly visible in the plot. White arrowheads indicate blood cells (which are depleted in mutant cells).

--> Many names of cell types for curation.

we generated chimeric mouse embryos in which Ta l 1−/− tdTomato+ mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells were injected into wild-type blastocysts.

urthermore, we noted that a subset of the EC3-mapped Ta l 1−/− cells also upregulated expression of cardiac-related genes such as Nkx2-5, Mef2c, and Tnnt 2 (Fig. 4f  ), consistent with a previous report that Ta l 1−/− yolk-sac cells can adopt a cardiomyocyte-like phenotype33. 

Our comprehensive atlas of mouse gastrulation and early organogenesis offers a powerful resource for investigating the molecular under-pinnings of cell-fate decisions during this key period of mammalian development.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91763038)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91763038)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91763038/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91763038&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-019-0933-9)  
