
The single-cell transcriptional landscape of mammalian organogenesis
====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91763046]  
  
Publication date : 20 of February, 2019  

# Highlights

. Using single-cell combinatorial indexing, we profiled the transcriptomes of around 2 million cells derived from 61 embryos staged between 9.5 and 13.5 days of gestation, in a single experiment. The resulting ‘mouse organogenesis cell atlas’ (MOCA) provides a global view of developmental processes during this critical window.

Single-cell RNA-seq of two million cells

We previously developed single-cell combinatorial-indexing RNA-sequencing analysis (sci-RNA-seq) and applied it to generate 50-fold shotgun coverage of the cellular content of L2-stage Caenorhabditis elegans.

Given that we are profiling RNA in nuclei, 59% of UMIs per cell strand specifically mapped to introns and 25% mapped to exons. The profiles may therefore primarily reflect nascent transcription, temporally offset, but also predictive21 of the cellular transcriptome. 

We used Scrublet22 to detect 4.3% likely doublet cells, corresponding to a doublet estimate of 10.3% including both within-cluster and between-cluster doublets

Among these differentially expressed genes, we identified 2,863 cell-type-specific marker genes—a mean of 75 differentially expressed genes per cell type, defined as genes with more than twofold expression difference between first- and second-ranked cell type (a cut-off of larger than fivefold yielded 932 marker genes; Extended Data Fig. 2i).

e detect the highest expression of sonic hedgehog (Shh)28 in the notochord (cluster 30), together with Ntn1, Slit1 and Spon1, which are all known to be expressed in the cells of the notochord a

To distinguish it from other cell atlases, we term the dataset described here as the mouse organogenesis cell atlas (MOCA). As there are pres-ently no comparable single-cell atlases of E9.5–E13.5, we compared MOCA subtypes to 130 fetal cell types (E14.5) of a recent mouse-cell atlas (MCA

, MOCA subtypes that failed to match MCA cell types tended to derive from earlier stages (for example, neural tube) or were rare (for example, lens),

--> organogenesis-stage dependent types; - 2.4.7.3 Differentia for cell classes: age and life stage
b, Dot plot showing expression of one selected marker gene per cell type. The size of the dot encodes the percentage of cells within a cell type in which that marker was detected, and its colour encodes the average expression level.

 In the resulting MOCA, we identify over 500 sub-types of cells and 56 developmental subtrajectories, each distinguished by multiple marker genes and collectively spanning essentially every organ system

 --> A lot of sub-types! (well, clusters, but also somehow subtimes)

 We have made MOCA and the underlying data freely available, together with a website to facilitate their further exploration (http://atlas.gs.washington.edu/mouse-rna).

 e anticipate that the comprehensive annotation of MOCA will benefit from community input and domain expertise, and to that end created an interactive wiki (http://atlas.gs.washington.edu/mouse-rna).

 --> nice

 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91763046)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91763046)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91763046/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91763046&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-019-0969-X)  
