
Charting cellular identity during human in vitro β-cell differentiation
=======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91865409]  
  
Publication date : 08 of May, 2019  

# Highlights

Here, as a step towards understanding this differentiation process, we report the transcriptional 
profiling of more than 100,000 human cells undergoing in vitro β-cell differentiation, and describe the cells that emerged. 

 We implement a scalable re-aggregation 
technique to deplete non-endocrine cells and identify CD49a (also known as ITGA1) as a surface marker of the β-cell 
population, which allows magnetic sorting to a purity of 80%.

n the SC-β-cell protocol1, human pluripotent stem cells grown in 
3D clusters are differentiated into six stages using specific inducing 
factors to produce ‘stem-cell-derived islets’ (SC-islets) that contain 
SC-β-cells. 

The major populations we identified (Fig. 1c–g, Supplementary 
Fig. 1) are progenitors (in stages 3 and 4), three types of endocrine 
cells (in stages 4, 5 and 6) and one type of non-endocrine cell (in stages 
5 and 6). In both of our modified protocols, cells at stage 3 comprise 
a single population of replicating pancreatic progenitors (PDX1+). 
By the end of stage 4, we observe NKX6-1+ progenitors as well as the 
first α-like cells. Finally, at stages 5 and 6, we observe three classes of 
CHGA+ endocrine cells: (i) SC-β-cells that express INS, NKX6-1, ISL1 
and other β-cell markers; (ii) α-like cells that express GCG, ARX, IRX2 
and also INS; and (iii) an endocrine cell type that expresses CHGA, 
TPH1, LMX1A and SLC18A1 that most resembles enterochromaffin 
cells (hereafter SC-EC cells) (Extended Data Fig. 1b).


Beyond these major populations, both of the modified protocols 
include a small population of SST+HHEX+ISL1+ cells that emerge 
as early as the end of stage 4. A single population, labelled by high 
levels of FOXJ1+, was present in only one of the modified protocols 
(Extended Data Table 2). Although our protocol variants showed large 
differences in cell-type ratios (Fig. 1d–g, Extended Data Fig. 1f–i), as 
expected, every cell type that was shared across protocols showed a 
similar gene-expression signature (Extended Data Fig. 1j). We conclude 
that population ratios can be markedly affected by protocol modifica-
tions without altering the identities of the cell types

). Genes with higher 
expression in α-cells were higher in SC-α-cells, whereas β-cell-enriched 
genes were higher in SC-β-cells (Extended Data Fig. 4c, d). This result 
is consistent with previous findings that in vitro-derived poly-hormo-
nal cells resolve to mono-hormonal cells that express glucagon22. Cells 
that co-express insulin and glucagon have been observed in two con-
texts: human fetal pancreatic development, in which INS+GCG+ARX+ 
cells are described as α precursors23, and in type 2 diabetes, in which 
INS+GCG+ cells are described as de-differentiated β-cells2


Beta cells are front-runners in the field of regenerative medicine. 
Nonetheless, directed differentiation protocols for β-cells produce other 
cells alongside them. In this study, we use single-cell RNA sequencing 
experiments to comprehensively characterize the cells that are formed 
during SC-β-cell differentiation.

ts. When necessary, we repeated com-
munity detection on a subset of the cells to improve the cell annotations. We noted 
that keeping only mutual edges improved our ability to resolve SST+HHEX+ cells, 
which correspond to the cluster that is the most difficult to correctly distinguish 
in the data. For each dataset, this dimensionality reduction procedure followed by 
clustering was carried out twice per dataset. A first pass was used to identify clusters 
with lower average library sizes, lack of expression markers (as defined using the 
previously published42 score) or clear doublet expression patterns. For the stage-5 
and stage-6 time courses, this first pass of filtering was carried out once per time 
point, and once again for the complete datasets (and the full datasets were used 
thereafter).  
# Comments

Loved the cell plots.
## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91865409)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91865409)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91865409/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91865409&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-019-1168-5)  
