Interneuron Types as Attractors and Controllers
===============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91829732]  
  
Publication date : 12 of July, 2019  

# Highlights

We previously suggested that interneuron types should be defined by their role in cortical processing. Here, we revisit the question of how to codify their diversity based upon their division of labor and function as controllers of cortical information flow

We suggest that developmental trajectories provide a guide for appreciating interneuron diversity and argue that subtype identity is generated using a configurational (rather than combinatorial) code of transcription factors that produce attractor states in the underlying gene regulatory network.

We present our updated three-stage model for interneuron specification: an initial cardinal step, allocating interneurons into a few major classes, followed by definitive refinement, creating subclasses upon settling within the cortex, and lastly, state determination, reflecting the incorporation of interneurons into functional circuit ensembles. 

We close by discussing findings indicating that major interneuron classes are both evolutionarily ancient and conserved.

We propose that the complexity of cortical circuits is generated by phylogenetically old interneuron types, complemented by an evolutionary increase in principal neuron diversity. 

This suggests that a natural neurobiological definition of interneuron types might be derived from a match between their developmental origin and computational function.

<!-- Very good abstract -->

Beginning in the 1980s, it was recognized that particular interneuron morphologies are associated with the expression of specific molecular markers [e.g., parvalbumin (PV)] and predictable intrinsic physiological properties (e.g., fast spiking); however, the number of subtypes and the basis for their generation remained obscure

In a previous review (Kepecs & Fishell 2014) we examined the question of interneuron diversity and argued that focusing on their roles in neural computation will be the ultimate arbiter for interneuron classification

Cortical circuits are mainly composed of excitatory neurons, often with strongly recurrent connections and fewer inhibitory neurons that curb local excitations. The core function of inhibition is to provide balance by dynamically suppressing excitation to enable rich and rapid dynamics.

2.1. Diverse Family of Specialists for Controlling Excitation

Classic studies have identified a rich assortment of inhibitory neuron types through their morphology, expression of protein markers, coreleased neuromodulators, complement of ion channels, intrinsic firing patterns, and many other ways 

. Interestingly, one method to categorize interneurons is based on their synaptic targeting since many varieties specialize in targeting distinct pyramidal cell domains or compartments

Figure 1  Distinct interneuron subtypes specialize in targeting different domains of pyramidal cells and each other. Different interneuron subtypes target distinct regions of the axo-somato-dendritic axes of pyramidal cells. 

Recent results reveal that acetylcholine can turn SST interneurons on or off based on their subtypes (Munoz et al. 2017)

We suggest that interneuron diversity is generated through nature, nurture, and circumstance: (a) Cardinal specification (nature) occurs when interneurons become postmitotic and defines their intrinsic properties; (b) definitive specification (nurture) relies on cues imposed during migration and at the settling position and determines local afferent and efferent connectivity; and (c) state specification (circumstance) transpires when some interneuron subtypes change their gene expression in the context-specific brain activity.

While the absolute number of cardinal classes and their associated subtypes remains a matter of debate, it appears that in some cortical regions as many as 90% of all interneurons are derived from one of the four largest cardinal classes (Kim et al. 2017, Rudy et al. 2011

 Tasic, Yao, and colleagues (Tasic et al. 2018) found that pyramidal neurons in the visual and anterior lateral motor cortex of mice can be transcriptionally divided into approximately 56 subtypes. However, their local flavor varies in the range of hundreds of genes, which could allow paralog subtypes to be distinguished across these regions.

 <!-- Well, mostly distinct clusters, not necessarily types -->

 Indeed, recent work shows that specific synaptic proteins can direct the connectivity of specific interneuronal subtypes (Favuzzi et al. 2019)

 beautiful example of this is that CA3 mossy fibers can form drastically different synapses onto hippocampal interneurons versus pyramidal neurons (Maccaferri et al. 1998) [the process quite possibly depends on splicing by adhesion molecules like neurexin, as shown by the Scheiffele laboratory

 Combinatorial codes are imagined to collectively specify a cell's fate, like a unique barcode. Such a model suggests that a precise combination of TFs cooperatively activate a gene program that determines a neuron's identity. Alternatively, and perhaps more reasonably, a combination of expressed TFs may act individually to bestow particular properties on a neuron such as its firing properties, morphology, or connectivity. This latter idea has been championed in the terminal selector model of neuronal identity (Hobert 2016), which has been beautifully described and documented in the nematode

 <!-- This Hobert 2016 article is in my "toread" list -->
. Nonetheless, we suggest that the top-down GRNs that transcriptionally act to direct the expression of terminal selectors may be better described by a configurational code through attractor dynamics rather than a static combinatorial code.

3.3. State Specification: To What Extent Do Interneurons Adjust Their Function in Accordance with Local Circumstance?
Increasingly powerful methods for analyzing the transcriptional profiles within specific interneuronal adult subclasses have provided clear evidence that particular subtypes exist as discrete transcriptional states (Hodge et al. 2018, Tasic et al. 2018). I

So, with further efforts, will we be able to identify combinations of TFs that specify interneuronal subtypes? Recent findings from the Baldwin laboratory (Tsunemoto et al. 2018) offer hope that this may be possible. In this work, they identify 76 combinations of TFs that can neuralize fibroblasts in a manner akin to how Yamanaka factors transform somatic cells into stem cells (Yamanaka 2008). However, in both these cases the TFs are likely acting as attractors rather than as combinatorial determinants. Specifically, as beautifully shown by Jaenisch and colleagues (Buganim et al. 2012, Shu et al. 2013), somatic cells forced to express Yamanaka factors rapidly induce other determinants that are needed for somatic cells to progress into stem cells. Hence, reprogramming occurs through the activation of a transcriptional program, transitioning a cell into a different attractor state, and can be driven by a few TFs alone.

If a combinatorial code was all there was, cell identities, as with the special case of Nkx2.1, should be destabilized by the loss of single factors.


The cardinal interneuronal divisions are determined by a low number of TFs in a manner akin to the action of Yamanaka factors. As refinement progresses, the seeding cardinal factors induce gene networks defined by multiple configurational codes (see Figures 3–5). Recognizing this explains why the best Cre lines for targeting specific cell types, including interneurons, take advantage of fortuitous genes that encode for proteins other than TFs, such as PV, SST, and VIP. The answer seems clear: The selection of cell fate relies on configurational rather than combinatorial codes.


Visually, it is obvious that as the ridges confine the identity of each cell type they also create basins of attraction, which makes the process robust to external perturbations.
This conceptual picture can be backed up by a rich mathematical theory of dynamical systems, translating Waddington's concepts of chreods (canalized paths of development) to trajectories and homeorhesis (the tendency to return to a path) to attractor states
If the dynamics of these networks are dissipative and ultimately form local minima, then the arising stable attractor states will correspond to cell identity. 
The temporal evolution of cell states can then be described by the gradient of this potential energy function, formally known as a Lyapunov function, reflecting the slopes of these landscapes. 

Modeling cardinal classes and their associated subtypes as network attractors can explain a swath of existing data. For instance, within the spinal cord, overexpression of a number of different Hox genes can alter motor neuron identity at limb levels because their activation can force the system to a new basin of attraction.


 In this context, the difference between a combinatorial and configurational code may seem semantic. 
 However, configurational codes, unlike combinatorial codes, are dynamic and evolve over time.
  In our configurational model, with the exception of the major cardinal classes, the energy functions separating different cell types during early postmitotic development are shallow, and thus it is easier to move between different states. 
 Upon attaining their settling positions within the cortex, the valleys separating specific subtypes may become deeper, making it more difficult to perturb or switch between subtypes. 
 Finally, in mature interneurons, configurational dynamic changes still occur in a limited way within local minima.
These changes represent cell states, which may be described as flat valleys (so-called line attractors) and result in dynamic cell states instead of fixed-point attractors.
 <!-- Very interesting phrasing -->



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91829732)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91829732)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91829732&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1146/ANNUREV-NEURO-070918-050421)  

# Reading dates
  
 * 2023-07-24
 * 2023-07-25
