
Heterogeneity of neutrophils
============================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91997728]  

# Highlights

Immunity functions through the concerted actions of diverse cell types with specialized tasks

Hence, a central goal of modern immunology has been to catalogue cells in an effort to unify observations, generate hypotheses and propose basic biological principles

--> Cell types or cells??

However, ‘naming’ subsets creates rules and restrictions that typically prevent capturing the true biology of a cell. This observation is particularly evident for‘plastic’ immune cells, for which the capacity to adapt to environmental changes is a defining property

In this Opinion article, we present a critical discussion of neutrophil heterogeneity.

Neutrophils are the most abundant circulating leukocytes in humans. Historically, granulocyte precursors in humans have been defined from density gradients followed by histological inspection of the different fractions upon Giemsa staining. In addition to the various types of immature neutrophils at different stages of maturation, the bone marrow is also a site for recycling of circulating neutrophils, at least in mice.

Under steady-state conditions, neutrophils circulate for about half a day before infiltrating tissues. Marked diurnal changes in phenotype do occur, a phenomenon referred to as neutrophil ageing. Neutrophils adjust their functions to the changing demands of the day — for example, to protect from microbial invasions during the animal’s active phase (when the exposure to pathogens is highest) or to exert reparative functions during the resting phase. 

--> That is of utmost importance! How many articles state in which circadian moment an statement is valid?
    Whenever the times of collection are not randomized, this introduces systematic bias! 

Do tissue-specific neutrophils exist?

--> Obviously 

Marginal zone neutrophils in the human spleen adopt unique B cell-stimulating properties.

# Comments
References fluctuate between human, mouse or general "neutrophils".
