
Toward a Common Coordinate Framework for the Human Body
=======================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q91960464]  
  
Publication date : 01 of December, 2019  

# Highlights

 Here, we review previous efforts and discuss chal-lenges involved in establishing such a common coordinate framework, the underlying map of tis-sues and organs.

 n order to create atlases that integrate high-resolution molec-ular and spatial information across individuals, however, it willbe necessary to have a common coordinate framework (CCF)to reference and address diverse types of biological data (Box1).


ecause the extent of anatomicalreproducibility varies across scales, identifying mappablefeatures (‘‘landmarks’’) at multiple levels of resolution repre-sents a key challenge for building a CCF (Box 1). 


Macro-CCF: A CCF describing tissues at the gross anatomicallevel at the organ, multi-organ, or whole body scale.Meso-scale CCF: A CCF at the scale between gross anatomy anddetailed histology.Micro-scale CCF: A CCF focused on local tissue organizationrather than the shape and structure of an entire organ.


n the highly organizedextreme, the optimal strategy is to know the physical location ofa sample, cell, etc.aprioriby registering it to a pre-existingcoordinate system. The alternative, better suited to samples lack-ingaclearorganizationalstructure,istolearnthesample’slocationbased on cellular, histological, and/or anatomical featurescollected directly as data—that is, the map is a learned function.


A canonical example of a human landmark-based spatialframework is the Talairach and Tournoux coordinate system,which sought to encompass both the remarkable consistencyin overall human brain structure and the different shapes andsizes of individual brains (Talairach and Szikla, 1967). Here, theanatomical landmarks are the anterior commissure (AC) andposterior commissure (PC), two of the axon bundles (commis-sures) that cross the brain midline at different defined points


At one end of our spectrum are highly stereotypical systemswhere anatomical positions from one sample can be ‘‘invariantlyaligned’’ to an independent specimen. This use case requiresboth biological and technical reproducibility, which is onlyfeasible in model organisms.

  conceptually  different  approach  to  constructing  bothanatomical templates and coordinate systems is to learn theirrepresentation, or their salient features, directly from organ, tis-sue, and cell data, either exploiting prior information or entirelyde novo(Figure 3C). I


A hierarchical organization of coordinate sys-tems (an ‘‘atlas of atlases’’) represents an attractive alternative,with each layer generated using different data types and capableof modeling variation at distinct scales.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q91960464)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q91960464)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q91960464/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q91960464&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2019.11.019)  
