
Single-Cell RNA-Seq Reveals AML Hierarchies Relevant to Disease Progression and Immunity
========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92083751]  
  
Publication date : 28 of February, 2019  

# Highlights
•
Technology for high-throughput single-cell RNA sequencing and genotyping
•
Variable cell-type composition of AML correlates to genetics and outcome
We combined single-cell RNA sequencing and genotyping to profile 38,410 cells from 40 bone marrow aspirates, including 16 AML patients and five healthy donors. We then applied a machine learning classifier to distinguish a spectrum of malignant cell types whose abundances varied between patients and between subclones in the same tumor. 


Primitive AML cells, commonly referred to as leukemia stem cells (LSCs), sustain the disease and display stem cell properties, such as self-renewal, quiescence, and therapy resistance (Pollyea and Jordan, 2017). Differentiated AML cells lack self-renewal capacity, but could affect tumor biology through pathologic effects on the tumor microenvironment or hematopoietic function.

To characterize the baseline cellular diversity in healthy BM, we carried out scRNA-seq using a high-throughput nanowell-based protocol, termed Seq-Well (Gierahn et al., 2017). We profiled viably frozen cells from four healthy donors (ages 21–56) and enriched progenitors from a fifth donor (CD34+CD38– and CD34+) (Figures S1A and S1B; Table S1). Barcoded sequencing reads were assigned to cells and aligned to the transcriptome, and individual mRNA molecules were counted using unique molecular identifiers (UMIs). We acquired high-quality data for 7,698 healthy donor BM cells.
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92083751)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92083751)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q92083751&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2019.01.031)  
