
Evaluation of knowledge graph embedding approaches for drug-drug interaction prediction in realistic settings
=============================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92091011]  
  
Publication date : 18 of December, 2019  

# Highlights

Predicting potential drug-drug interaction helps
reduce unanticipated drug interactions and drug development costs and optimizes the drug design process. Methods
for prediction of DDIs have the tendency to report high accuracy but still have little impact on translational research
due to systematic biases induced by networked/paired data. In this work, we aimed to present realistic evaluation
settings to predict DDIs using knowledge graph embeddings.

A study by Lazarou et al. [1] estimates
6.7% of hospitalized patients experience serious adverse
drug effects with fatality rate 0.32% in the USA.

The traditional CV where test pairs might share components with training
pairs is prone to over-fitting due to systematic biases in
networked/paired data [26–29]. There have been a few
studies which have addressed this issue [27, 28, 30, 31].

Shi et al. [39] proposes a matrix factorization model
to predict enhancive (positive) and degressive (negative)
drug drug interactions (DDIs) using drug binding proteins
as a feature. They try to find balanced/unbalanced drug
communities on the network of enhancing and depressive
DDIs and predict DDIs for the cold-start scenario.

RDF2Vec is a recently published methodology that adapts
the language modeling approach of word2vec [54] to RDF
Graph Embeddings.

TransE uses an energy-based model to embed the knowl-
edge graph into low-dimensional vector space. In TransE,
the relations in a knowledge graph are represented as
translation from head entity to tail entity so that vector
embeddings should satisfy h + r ≈ t where a triple (h, r, t)
in training set S is composed of two entities h, t ∈ E
(the set of entities) and relationship r ∈ R (the set of
relationships).

In this study, we showed that the knowledge embeddings
are powerful predictors and comparable to current state-
of-the-art methods for inferring new DDIs.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92091011)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92091011)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q92091011&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/S12859-019-3284-5)  
