
Evolution of neuronal types and families
========================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92075211]  
  
Publication date : 01 of March, 2019  

# Highlights
• Solving nervous system evolution requires cross-species comparison of neuronal types.

• Neuronal types are commonly defined by their specific structure and function.

• We provide an operational definition of cell types that allows evolutionary comparison.

• The identity of neuronal types is best reflected by specifying transcription factors.

• Families of related neuronal types are conserved across large evolutionary distances.

Here, we review recent conceptual progress toward an evolutionary definition of cell types, and how it facilitates the identification and large-scale comparison of neuronal types and neuron type families from single-cell data
gure 1). One of the most exciting questions is when and in what form the first neuron emerged

Pivotal to testing these hypotheses is resolving what a cell type actually is. That is, what are we to identify and compare with single cell data and why?

 More recently, Zeng and Sanes have suggested that a neuronal cell type is “a population of neurons with properties that are homogeneous within the population but differ from those of other neurons” [31]).

 To illustrate the value in considering evolutionary history, a view on the very beginnings of animal multicellularity is most helpful. Before cell types came into existence, the cells that constituted our unicellular ancestors used all information available in the genome, at least over their life time.

 overall accessible genomic information per cell equaled the genome


 The evolutionary process itself also plays a part in blurring the lines between cell state and cell type. In a particularly well-studied example, the origin of a novel type of fibroblast in the uterus of placental mammals was instigated initially by environmental variation (in this case pregnancy), followed by the evolution of a new regulatory complex that locked in its unique expression program

 Cell type families
A key observation about cell types is that they are not equally dissimilar from each other, but rather form a transcriptional hierarchy within the organism


If the diversification of cell types has indeed occurred in a hierarchical manner in animal evolution, the fascinating hypothesis emerges that cell type families should be shared between animal groups; and the most ancient and biggest cell type families should be shared between all animals, provided that the respective split of regulatory programs predated the last common metazoan ancestor.


Branching events in the cell type tree represent the birth of sister cell types, accompanied by cellular innovations (gains, modifications, or losses of structure/function, see below) that make them distinct. For example, we can map the birth of the first neuron onto such a hypothetical tree — which later diversified into a family of neuron types that exists in cnidarians and bilaterians (black box and brackets in Figure 2). This family might comprise, for example, the interneurons and motor neurons of the bilaterian trunk. Our hypothetical tree also illustrates that, at least in most cases, individual neuronal cell types should often be species-specific and unlikely to be specifically shared between two compared species. True 1:1 homologies of cell types will only apply if no further diversification events have occurred since the species split. In most cases, homology will be apparent at the family level (colored lines in the figure). This has practical implications for comparative datasets, as comparisons between species must be made not only at the level of individual cell types, but among all levels of the cell type hierarchy.

 On the other hand, cell types that are evolutionarily closely related (as shown by overall similarity of expression and transcriptional regulators), often arise from distant developmental precursors. This is observed for example for vertebrate osteocytes, arising from the ectodermal neural crest or from the mesodermal lineage.
<!-- This is a very important fact -->

Famous apomeres: nematocysts, opsins, and synapses
If it is not for primary classification — what is the significance of cellular structure and function in the context of an evolutionary cell type definition? Here, an entirely new perspective emerges, which focuses on the structural/functional innovation characteristic for a given cell type.

 Such new cell type-specific modules, or new variants of modules, representing structural/functional innovation, have been termed apomeres (analogous to apomorphies at the species level) [32].

Conclusions
T
o unravel the real, historic tree of neuronal types, we require comparative data that must be informative about 

(1) the distinct complements of cell types in today’s animal phyla; 
(2) how they assemble into cell type families and how these families are interrelated; 
(3) the regulatory changes underlying the birth of new sister cell types; and 
(4), the cellular innovations characteristic for diversifying cell type families.

 The key to resolving these debates requires a clear definition of cell types that distinguishes phenotypic evolution from the origination of new cell types.
 
  Only with this in hand can the centralization, cell type diversification, and other key innovations, of animal nervous systems be fully understood.

# Comments


## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92075211)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92075211)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q92075211&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CONB.2019.01.022)  

# Reading dates
  
 * 2023-09-05
