
Lineage Tracing in Humans Enabled by Mitochondrial Mutations and Single-Cell Genomics
=====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92083738]  
  
Publication date : 28 of February, 2019  

# Highlights

• Somatic mtDNA mutations can track cellular relationships and hierarchies in vitro
• Single-cell genomic assays faithfully detect mtDNA mutations

We hypothesized that mtDNA sequence variation could provide an innate and natural barcode from which to infer clonal relationships.

To compare mitochondrial mutations to an exogenous gold standard of clone detection, we used a lentiviral barcoding approach (Kester and van Oudenaarden, 2018, Woodworth et al., 2017). 

We analyzed mitochondrial genotypes from bulk RNA-seq of 8,820 individual samples in the GTEx project, spanning 49 tissues with at least 25 donors, as well as 462 donors with at least 10 tissues (Battle et al., 2017; Figure 4A; Table S2; STAR Methods). There was significant variation in the proportion of mitochondrial reads mapping to the mitochondrial transcriptome across tissues, consistent with known differences in the absolute numbers of mitochondria and levels of mitochondrial gene expression in each tissue (Figures 4B, 4C, and S4A).

Most of the predicted deleterious mutations (STAR Methods) did not show an appreciable difference in median heteroplasmy compared to the benign ones (Figures S4C and S4D), although high heteroplasmic (>20%) mutations were present at ∼3.6- to 4.4-fold fewer than expected (Figures S4E and S4F). Of note, these levels are substantially below the estimated biochemical threshold of 60%–90% heteroplasmy, where deleterious mtDNA mutations are generally thought to have an effect (Stewart and Chinnery, 2015).


To test our approach in solid tissues and tumors, we analyzed EPCAM+ cells from a colorectal adenocarcinoma primary tumor resection by bulk ATAC-seq and scRNA-seq (Figure 7A). To derive the non-cancer mtDNA genotype, we processed EPCAM+ cells from two adjacent, presumed healthy sites by bulk ATAC-seq. We identified 11 mtDNA mutations specific to the tumor and absent in adjacent healthy tissue (Figure 7B).






# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92083738)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92083738)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q92083738&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2019.01.022)  
