
Setting the basis of best practices and standards for curation and annotation of logical models in biology-highlights of the [BC]2 2019 CoLoMoTo/SysMod Workshop
================================================================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92104055]  
  
Publication date : 21 of April, 2020  

# Highlights


 Logical models have long been used to answer a variety of questions regarding the dynamical behaviours of regulatory networks. As the number of published logical models increases, there is a pressing need for systematic model annotation, referencing and curation in community-supported and standardised formats. This article summarises the key topics and future directions of a meeting entitled ‘Annotation and curation of computational models in biology’,

 To facilitate the exchanges of logical models and communication between tools, previous work by the CoLoMoTo consortium and Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) teams was focused on the standardisation of model formats by developing a specific package of the SBML level 3 (SBML L3) [6], SBML-qual [7, 8].

 For each component, they demonstrated how the description of complex signalling functions and their integration are essential to correctly predict health and disease states. Their work highlighted the essential role of expert curation to correctly identify and encode complex regulatory interactions from experimental literature. Failure to encode these relationships correctly can alter significantly the behaviour of the model and the derived predictions. Dynamical models should be fine-tuned by contextualisation to the specific biological system under study, and for this, proper annotation and expert curation are essential.

 Tom Freeman (Roslin Institute) presented a ‘graphical and computational model of the renal mammalian circadian clock’. A comprehensive graphical model of the circadian pathway was constructed using the modified Edinburgh Pathway Notation scheme [39] and used to analyse the diurnal pattern of gene expression in the mouse kidney [40] using a stochastic Petri net-based approach [41]

 Based on these discussions, four interdependent milestones were identified for the roadmap to CALMs in biology (Figure 2).

 


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92104055)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92104055)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q92104055/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q92104055&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/BIB/BBAA046)  
