
Collagen-producing lung cell atlas identifies multiple subsets with distinct localization and relevance to fibrosis
===================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92130381]  
  
Publication date : 21 of April, 2020  

# Highlights

We characterize multiple collagen-producing subpopulations with distinct anatomical localizations in different compartments of murine lungs. One subpopulation, characterized by expression of Cthrc1 (collagen triple helix repeat containing 1), emerges in fibrotic lungs and expresses the highest levels of collagens. Single-cell RNA-sequencing of human lungs, including those from idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and scleroderma patients, demonstrate similar heterogeneity and CTHRC1-expressing fibroblasts present uniquely in fibrotic lungs

 Cthrc1+ fibroblasts are more migratory than other subsets of collagen-producing cells and demonstrate an enhanced capacity to colonize the lungs of bleomycin-treated mic

 We also detected Ces1d signals in airway epithelial cells, which is consistent with our whole lung scRNA-seq data (Supplementary Fig. 2b), but not in Col-GFP+ cells in bronchovascular cuffs (Fig. 2b).

 
Adventitial fibroblasts closely associated with type 4 collagen surrounding the bronchovascular cuffs (Fig. 3c, Supplementary Movie 2). 


The specific markers for the cells described as “lipofibroblasts” in Xie et al. such as Ear1, Ear2, Mrc1, or Clec4n, were all expressed in Ptprc (CD45)+ Itgax (CD11c)+ Siglecf+ alveolar macrophages (Supplementary Fig. 1a, 3d)6. General lipofibroblast markers such as Plin2 and Lpl were also expressed in clusters 0, 1, 2, consistent with previous reports that Pdgfra+ Tcf21+ Col13a1+ alveolar fibroblasts have some phenotypic features of lipofibroblasts

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92130381)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92130381)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q92130381&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41467-020-15647-5)  
