
ROBOT: A Tool for Automating Ontology Workflows
===============================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92260004]  
  
Publication date : 29 of July, 2019  

# Highlights


In the Open Biological and Biomedical Ontologies (OBO) community, we recognized the need to package a wide range of low-level OWL API functionality into a library of common higher-level operations and to make those operations available as a command-line tool.

ROBOT provides ontology processing commands for a variety of tasks, including commands for converting formats, running a reasoner, creating import modules, running reports, and various other tasks.

Noy, Tudorache, Nyulas, and Musen (2010) describes a general ontology lifecycle with a focus on bio-ontologies [1]. First, requirements for the ontology are gathered. Then, the ontology is collaboratively developed in an ontology editor such as Protégé [2]. Once the requirements have been fulfilled, the ontology is published, and feedback is solicited from the community. Feedback is integrated back into development, and the ontology is continuously updated and released. At any point after the initial publication, the ontology may be deployed in other applications.

The core operations of the Onto-animal suite are driven by SPARQL queries against the centralized triplestore. This results in a number of limitations. First, only the specific version of each ontology loaded into that triplestore can be used. This is a particularly severe limitation during ontology development. Second, processing is done on the centralized server, limiting the processing power available to any user. Third, SPARQL has limited utility when working with OWL logical axioms.


Development began in 2015 and continues with more than 1000 commits from a dozen contributors. ROBOT is freely available open source software. Although we do not track our users, a recent GitHub search shows that at least 26 ontology projects in the OBO community have adopted ROBOT.

 The source code is written in Java and is available from our GitHub repository [16] under an open source (BSD 3) license. It is also released as a Java library on Maven Central. ROBOT code can be used from any programming language that runs on the Java Virtual Machine (JVM)


 The ROBOT source code consists of two parts: ‘robot-core’ and ‘robot-command’. ‘robot-core’ is a library supporting common ontology development tasks, which we call “operations”. ‘robot-command’ provides a command-line interface divided into “commands”, each of which wraps a ‘robot-core’ operation.

 Reasoning is one of the most important operations in ROBOT. The ‘reason’ command covers two uses: logical validation of an ontology and automatic classification. In both cases, users can choose their preferred reasoner, which is used to perform inference. Large ontologies such as the Gene Ontology typically use ELK [23], which performs reasoning quickly using the OWL EL profile. Smaller ontologies with richer axiomatization, such as the Relations Ontology, typically use a complete OWL DL reasoner such as HermiT [24].


 The resulting inferences are checked to ensure the ontology is logically coherent: the ontology must be consistent and have no unsatisfiable classes (i.e., classes that cannot be instantiated without introducing an inconsistency)

ROBOT’s ‘query’ command runs SPARQL queries on ontologies or other RDF resources.


 The ‘verify’ command is a variation on the ‘SPARQL SELECT’ execution. The queries are used to ensure that an ontology conforms to a predetermined set of conditions; for example, ensuring that no class has multiple textual definitions.

 The ‘report’ command is an extension of ‘query’ and ‘verify’ that provides a series of configurable quality control (QC) checks for an ontology and returns a spreadsheet or YAML output of the violations.

 Although most problems raised by ‘validate’ and ‘report’ must be fixed manually, ROBOT also provides a ‘repair’ command that can automatically fix certain problems. 

 ROBOT provides a template-driven ontology term generation system. Users also have the option to plug in their own term generation system into their workflow, such as Dead Simple OWL Design Patterns (DOS-DPs) [31]

 Because ROBOT commands can be executed on the command line, a number of different workflow systems can be used. We highlight the use of GNU Make [33], which is typically used to compile software. A Makefile consists of a set of rules used to make “targets”. In ontology development, the Makefile is used for automated tasks, such as preparing an ontology for release. In this case, the targets are usually ontology files. The “recipes” for the rules are Unix-style system commands, carried out by the ‘make’ command.

 ROBOT makes it easy for ontology developers to automate a wide range of tedious and error-prone development tasks, freeing their time to focus on other important parts of the ontology life cycle

 
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92260004)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92260004)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q92260004/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q92260004&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/S12859-019-3002-3)  
