
Two distinct interstitial macrophage populations coexist across tissues in specific subtissular niches
======================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92370531]  
  
Publication date : 01 of March, 2019  

# Highlights

In addition to alveolar macrophages, they identified two different interstitial macrophage populations. One population mostly abutted nerve fibers; the other population preferentially localized near blood vessels and appeared to support vessel integrity and inhibit inflammatory cell infiltration into tissues.

 For example, in the murine lung, alveolar macrophages are the major embryonically derived population in the alveolar spaces, whereas a minor population named interstitial macrophages (IMs) resides within the lung parenchyma.

 For example, in the murine lung, alveolar macrophages are the major embryonically derived population in the alveolar spaces, whereas a minor population named interstitial macrophages (IMs) resides within the lung parenchyma. Previous results reported several phenotypically distinct IM subpopulations, whose relationship remained unknown. Do they represent independent populations or, rather, different points on the spectrum of maturation and activation states? How do these differences relate to their localization in tissue or roles in tissue function in health and disease? Does such macrophage heterogeneity also exist in other tissues?

Here, using single-cell mRNA sequencing, we unbiasedly identified two independent populations exhibiting distinct gene expression profiles and phenotypes: Lyve1loMHCIIhiCX3CR1hi (Lyve1loMHCIIhi) and Lyve1hiMHCIIloCX3CR1lo (Lyve1hiMHCIIlo) RTMs. We uncovered evidence of parallel populations in multiple others tissues, including the heart, fat, and dermis, as well as in human lung and omental and subcutaneous fat tissues, suggesting that a similar dichotomy is observed in human tissues.

We identified two independent IM subpopulations that are conserved across tissues: Lyve1loMHCIIhiCX3CR1hi (Lyve1loMHCIIhi) and Lyve1hiMHCIIloCX3CR1lo (Lyve1hiMHCIIlo) monocyte-derived IMs, with distinct gene expression profiles, phenotypes, functions, and localizations. Using a new mouse model of inducible macrophage depletion
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92370531)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92370531)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q92370531&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.AAU0964)  
