
scRNA-seq assessment of the human lung, spleen, and esophagus tissue stability after cold preservation
======================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92354852]  
  
Publication date : 31 of December, 2019  

# Highlights

This study assesses the effect of cold storage on fresh healthy spleen, esophagus, and lung from≥5donors over 72 h. 

n conclusion, we present robust protocols for tissue preservation for up to 24 h prior to scRNA-seqanalysis. This greatly facilitates the logistics of sample collection for Human Cell Atlas or clinical studies since itincreases the time frames for sample processing.

However,  some  cell  types  are  more  vulnerable  to freezing than others, for example, in human endomet-rium biopsies, stromal cells survive freezing better thanepithelial cells [24].

--> Sensibility to freezing / cold storage: 1.4.4. Types of knowledge about cell types

n this study, we aimed to identify a method of tissuepreservation that would stabilize intact human tissuesamples for scRNA-seq but that requires minimal pro-cessing at the clinic and allows sample transportationtime. In order to contribute to the Human Cell Atlas, wetested the method on three human primary tissues ex-pected to have different sensitivities to ischemia [22]:spleen (most stable), esophagus mucosa, and lung (leaststable) [22]. These tissues contain cell types rangingfrom immune cells to keratinocytes.


. In our data, the fraction of mitochondrial reads waslow, with no significant change in proportion, except inthe spleen where mitochondrial reads increase by 72 h in4 out of 5 donors (Fig.2e, f). 

Import-antly, all time points and at least four different do-nors contributed to every cell type in all three tissues

Fig. 4Cell types identified in different organs with time


The esophagus yielded 87,947 cells with over 90% be-longing to the 4 major epithelial cell types: upper, strati-fied, suprabasal, and dividing cells of the suprabasallayer


Over 6000 plasma cellswere detected and annotated as plasmablasts, IgG, orIgM expressing plasma cells

We also carried out tissue-specific analysis of differen-tial gene expression. Genes more highly expressed inbulk derive from the cell types sensitive to dissociation.Pulmonary alveolar cells are very scarce in our single-cell lung data, but abundant in the tissue

When examining cell typechanges with time within donors, we noticed that theproportion of B cells increased in the spleen and that ofT cells decreased in the lung and spleen with storagetime 

--> Intriguing.


Having generated datasets for the esophagus, lung, andspleen, we examined if cell types that can be found in allthree organs, such as immune cells, would cluster byorgan or by cell type. Figure5c shows the result of hier-archical clustering using the 1000 most highly variablegenes in up to 10 cells per cell type, tissue, time, anddonor. In this analysis of approximately 7500 cells, wesee clear subclusters of mast cells, macrophages, andplasma cells with some substructure depending on thedonor and the tissue of origin, suggesting that more ex-tensive analysis will allow us to study tissue adaptationof different immune cell populations.

Relatively high variabilityin the proportions of cell types was seen between sam-ples. This was likely to be due to technical variation aswell as underlying biological variation as indicated bythe capture of rare structures such as glandular cells inonly some esophagus samples, namely from donor 325Cand 356C. Interestingly, histology on sections fromdonor 325C (12 h) confirmed the presence of glands(mucous secreting cells; Additional file1: Figure S2) thatwere not present in the other esophagus samples sec-tioned.

--> Cool, interindividual variability accountes

urther, we have generated detailed annotations onthree primary human tissues: spleen, esophagus, andlung. This dataset of over 240,000 single cells presents asignificant resource for further investigation of the biol-ogy of these tissues and contains the largest esophagusand spleen datasets to date
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92354852)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92354852)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q92354852/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q92354852&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/S13059-019-1906-X)  
