
SynGO: An Evidence-Based, Expert-Curated Knowledge Base for the Synapse
=======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92570196]  
  
Publication date : 03 of June, 2019  

# Highlights

•
SynGO is a public knowledge base and online analysis platform for synapse research
•
SynGO has annotated 1,112 genes with synaptic localization and/or function

SynGO annotations are exclusively based on published, expert-curated evidence. Using 2,922 annotations for 1,112 genes, we show that synaptic genes are exceptionally well conserved and less tolerant to mutations than other genes.


 SynGO is a public, universal reference for synapse research and an online analysis platform for interpretation of large-scale -omics data (https://syngoportal.org and http://geneontology.org).
--> Database still up! 

 However, the lack of systematic annotation of synaptic genes also limits progress. Available resources, including GO, have limited representations of synapse biology and lack a comprehensive ontology of synaptic processes and locations. Existing resources are biased by uneven and patchy coverage of different aspects of synapse biology. Moreover, existing resources include data that have not been curated by experts, and a large fraction of the data has been aggregated in an unsupervised manner; e.g., by automated text mining or large-scale experiments that result in high rates of false positives, such as bulk proteomics and yeast two-hybrid studies.

SynGO provides a unique, publicly accessible knowledge base (https://syngoportal.org) as a universal reference for synapse research and education and for enrichment studies of genomic associations, mRNA profiles, and proteomics data.

SynGO did not define mitochondria as part of a specific synaptic CC because mitochondrial proteins are already well annotated (Calvo et al., 2016, Smith and Robinson, 2019).

 SynGO Is Based on Expert Annotation and Systematic Evidence Tracking
Currently available synaptic protein lists contain many unsupervised inclusions, in particular from large-scale, automated experiments expected to have substantial false positive rates. SynGO established a systematic evidence tracking protocol and annotation by synapse experts only, based exclusively on published experimental data (PubMed). The SynGO workflow (Figure S1) was implemented in a web interface and used by the experts to annotate synaptic genes.

 SynGO 1.0 Provides 2,922 Expert-Curated Annotations on 1,112 Synaptic Genes

 As a first descriptive analysis, we compared basic structural features of SynGO-annotated synaptic genes with other genes.

 --> Generalized approach

  The third wave was prior to the last common ancestor of vertebrates, suggesting significant synaptic evolution in this period. SynGO genes gained during this last wave are again enriched for the postsynaptic density and now also the active zone and for more specific, largely regulatory processes (Figure S7E).

Synaptic Genes Are Enriched among Genes Associated with Various Brain Traits
Results from large-scale genetic studies are often used to test for association of a trait of interest with a set of functionally related genes. Such tests gain power with a higher confidence definition of the gene sets used. We predicted that expert-curated, evidence-based SynGO genes show robust associations with experimental data on brain traits and that SynGO gene sets are more strongly associated than existing synapse gene sets. 

 SynGO Is a Major Step Forward in Defining Synapses
Adequately defining a biological system like the synapse requires a coherent and logical definition of its components, their relationships, and how biological functions emerge from these. The SynGO ontology is the first to provide such definitions coherently for the synapse. The SynGO 1.0 ontology has defined 87 CC and 179 BP terms, designed in consensus by expert laboratories worldwide. Previous models suffered from the lack of a coherent, top-down design of synapse-related ontology terms and relations. Consequently, many heterogeneous terms, both specific and general, were positioned directly under the master term “synapse” (Figures 2A and 2B).

--> What they mean by "define" is unclear. 



# Comments
Wow, published in Neuron, awesome
## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92570196)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92570196)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q92570196&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.NEURON.2019.05.002)  
