
Spatiotemporal structure of cell fate decisions in murine neural crest
======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92571628]  
  
Publication date : 01 of June, 2019  

# Highlights
Cranial neural crest preferentially gives rise to a multitude of mesenchymal types of facial cartilage and bones, in addition to neuronal, glial, and pigment cell–type progeny. By contrast, trunk neural crest does not form bone or cartilage derivatives in vivo. The logic and molecular mechanisms that allow neural crest to resolve multiple potential cell fates at each axial level remain poorly understood.


We find that up to early migration, neural crest cells progress through a sequence of common transcriptional states, followed by fate bifurcations during migration that can be formalized as a series of sequential binary decisions.
The first decision separates sensory neuro-glial fate from all other fates, whereas the second decision occurs between autonomic and mesenchymal lineages and reveals a bipotent Phox2b+/Prrx1+ subpopulation

he first stable bifurcation separates sensory lineage from common progenitors of autonomic and mesenchymal branches. The second stable fate split, separating autonomic neuronal fate from mesenchymal differentiation, captures a spatially restricted process that takes place within the cervical region. Additional branches can be attributed to glial differentiation as they show expression of early glial markers (Mpz, Fabp7, Zfp488, Plp1, Sox10) and transcriptional signatures of E10.5 Schwann cell precursors (SCPs) 

Studies of neuroblastoma, a tumor of sympathetic nervous system that originates from neural crest cells, revealed that tumor cells can transit between adrenergic and mesenchymal phenotypes, creating inter- and intra-tumoral heterogeneity that poses a therapeutic challenge

Thus, cells expressing Prrx1 always differentiate into mesenchymal fates. As a result, when both Prrx1 and Phox2b master regulators are coactivated in the same cells, cell fate is resolved in the direction of mesenchymal derivates in vivo (Fig. 4B). No sensory neurons were traced from progenitors expressing Phox2b, demonstrating that Phox2b+ cells at the second bifurcation point are bipotent
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92571628)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92571628)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q92571628/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q92571628&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.AAS9536)  
