
Droplet scRNA-seq is not zero-inflated
======================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92644135]  
  
Publication date : 01 of February, 2020  

# Highlights


 Potential users of
single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq)1
often encounter a choice between highthroughput droplet-based methods and
high-sensitivity plate-based methods. There
is a widespread belief that scRNA-seq will
often fail to generate measurements for some
genes from some cells owing to technical
molecular inefficiencies. 


It is believed that
this causes data to have an overabundance
of zero values compared to what is expected
from random sampling and that this effect
is particularly pronounced in droplet-based
methods. Here I present an investigation
of published data for technical controls
in droplet-based scRNA-seq experiments
that demonstrates that the number of
zero values in the data is consistent with
common distributional models of molecule
sampling counts. Thus, any additional
zero values in biological data likely result
from biological variation or may reflect
variation in gene abundance among cell
types or cell states


n the field of computational methods
for scRNA-seq analysis, many methods
have been designed to correct zero values
in data, with the aim of allowing users to
predict what the expression level of a gene
in a cell would have been, had there been
no zero-inflation or dropouts11–17, referred
to as ‘imputation’

High-throughput droplet-based scRNAseq methods measure discrete counts
of unique molecular identifiers (UMIs).
The stochastic sampling of counts can
be modeled using a Gamma-Poisson
distribution, more colloquially known as
the ‘negative binomial’ distribution. Under
stochastic sampling of counts, zero values
are expected. When researchers discuss
‘zero-inflation’ or ‘dropouts’, they refer
to observing more ‘technical zeros’ than
expected, which would pose challenges
when estimating molecular abundance.
This is not a concern with the expected
‘sampling zeros

(Table 1). This makes it clear that
genes with unexpected zero values are
due to biological variation. Biological data
with single cells in droplets have hundreds
of genes 10 percentage points away from
expectation. In contrast, technical data
with RNA solution in droplets only have
at most one gene as far as 10 percentage
points away from expectation. W

What is important to remember is
that even when count data are transformed
or ‘normalized’, they still exhibit properties that are different from naturally continuous
data. This also implies the number of
zero values observed can be decreased by
counting more molecules through global
increases in capture efficiency or increased
sequencing depths per droplet.

# Comments

This is important to keep in mind when analysing scRNA-seq data.


## Tags
- 1.4.2. A focus on single-cell RNA sequencing 
- 1.4.2.1. Wet-lab methods and their differences
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92644135)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92644135)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q92644135/P921%3BP4510)  
