
Ontology-driven integrative analysis of omics data through Onassis
==================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92783288]  
  
Publication date : 20 of January, 2020  

# Highlights

We introduce Onassis, an R package within the Bioconductor environment providing key functionalities of Natural Language Processing (NLP) tools. Leveraging biomedical ontologies, Onassis greatly simplifies the association of samples from large-scale repositories to their representation in terms of ontology-based annotations.

--> Nice

Moreover, through the use of semantic similarity measures, Onassis hierarchically organizes the datasets of interest, thus supporting the semantically aware analysis of the corresponding omics data

Moreover, despite the introduction of standards such as MINSEQE and MIAME4, sample metadata are typically highly heterogeneous thus making samples retrieval complicated. 

Moreover, despite the introduction of standards such as MINSEQE and MIAME4, sample metadata are typically highly heterogeneous thus making samples retrieval complicated. 

With the aim of lowering the barrier to data reuse, we developed Onassis (Ontology Annotations and Semantic Similarity Software), a tool that leverages NLP techniques, biomedical ontologies, and the R statistical framework, to identify, relate, and analyze datasets from public repositories.

he package functionalities assist users in performing the following tasks (Fig. 1):

  - building a dictionary with concepts from Open Biomedical Ontologies (OBO)15

  - retrieving metadata associated with collections of GEO samples (dataset)

  - configuring and running a named entity recognition pipeline to annotate retrieved metadata (or any collections of textual documents) with the previously built dictionary, therefore associating them with ontology concepts

  - structuring the dataset of interest by hierarchically organizing its samples according to the semantic similarity between their associated ontology terms

  - performing a semantically-driven statistical analysis of the actual omics data in the dataset.


In particular, the metadata of GEO samples, a reference repository in the field, can be conveniently accessed in Onassis via GEOmetadb16. This package stores the metadata of GEO samples and datasets in an SQLite database, with tables containing information such as the title of the experiment, the list of samples, their descriptions, details about the organism, sequencing libraries, description of treatments, and other attributes

XML dictionaries, required by Conceptmapper, can be automatically generated by Onassis starting from OBO ontologies (in both OBO v1.2 and OWL formats). Entries of the dictionary are specified by a canonical name and one or more variants (synonyms).

Once samples of large dataset are associated to concepts of a biomedical ontology, it could become evident that the various experiments are not independent. Indeed, the associated concepts are likely to reveal samples that can be considered equivalent or very similar, and others that can be considered far from each other. 

Another package, MeSHSsim25 allows the computation of semantic similarities between MeSH headings, but this is tailored for MEDLINE documents.s

Various similarity measures are available within Onassis by wrapping functions from the Semantic measures library and toolkit26. Specifically, the ontology, represented as a graph, can be traversed to calculate the semantic similarity between pairs (pairwise similarity) or groups (group-wise similarity) of concepts. This is important for determining the similarity between samples that can be easily associated to multiple concepts. Noteworthy, since most of the semantic similarity measures consider only one type of edge and given that “part-of” relationships are widely used in current ontologies, we converted them into the most common “is-a” type.

--> This wording is bad. They just ignored relation labels.

Finally, Onassis allows users to combine similarities from multiple ontologies by using any aggregating function of choice (such as mean, median or more complex functions)

Use Cases

We adopted Onassis for the integrative analysis of large-scale omics datasets in three different contexts: (i) a large dataset of H3K27ac ChIP-seq samples; (ii) a compendia of 620 RNA-seq samples from GEO; (iii) a large-compendia of ~15 K DNA-methylation samples. These analyses, which are presented below, illustrate how Onassis functionalities can be used for a semantically-aware analysis of omics data.


Metadata were annotated with Onassis based on the CL and DOID ontologies, to determine cell line/tissue(s) and disease(s) associated with each dataset

--> hm, cell lines with CL? 

https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/Onassis.html
--> build is throing error


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92783288)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92783288)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q92783288/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q92783288&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41598-020-57716-1)  
