
A Derived Positional Mapping of Inhibitory Subtypes in the Somatosensory Cortex
===============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92856630]  
  
Publication date : 06 of August, 2019  

# Highlights
One strategy is, therefore, to
obtain as many single-cell transcriptomes as possible and isolate clusters of neurons
with similar gene expression profiles.

In principle,
any data that constrains what can occur in a particular part of the brain can also
strongly constrain the derivation of cell-types. This draft inhibitory cell-type mapping is
therefore dynamic and can iteratively converge towards the ground truth as further data
is integrated.

Currently, inhibitory neurons in rodent somatosensory cortex
can be categorized into at least the following morphological
types: Martinotti cells (MC), Double Bouquet cells (DB), Bitufted
Cells (BC), Bipolar cells (BP), Neurogliaform Cells (NGC),
Chandelier Cells (ChC), Small Basket Cells (SBC), Large Basket
Cells (LBC), and Nest Basket Cells (NBC; Markram et al.,
2004).

We focus on interneurons because there is a clearly-identified subset of proteins known to
be expressed in separate populations of interneurons: calbindin
(CB), calretinin (CR), neuropeptide Y (NPY), parvalbumin (PV),
somatostatin (SOM) and vasointestinal peptide (VIP; Rudy et al.,
2011; Tremblay et al., 2012).

Based on these approaches, morphological interneuron types
can then be categorized depending on the expression level (RNA
and/or protein) of each of these markers. For example, NGC
cells are positive for NPY (Zambrano, 2012), ChC cells are
positive for PV (Tremblay et al., 2016) and in some cases CB
(del Rio and DeFelipe, 1997; Rocco et al., 2017),

FIGURE 5 | High-resolution fitting results. (A) Experimental profiles for Small Basket Cells (SBC), Double Bouquet (DB), Large and Nest Basket Cells (LBC-NBC),
Bipolar cells (BP), Bitufted Cells (BC), Martinotti Cells (MC), Chandelier cells (ChC). (B) The predicted marker distribution (red) and experimental marker distribution
(black).

--> Nice figure


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92856630)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92856630)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q92856630&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/FNANA.2019.00078)  
