
A cellular census of human lungs identifies novel cell states in health and in asthma
=====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q92826478]  
  
Publication date : 17 of June, 2019  

# Highlights

We report location-dependent airway epithelial cell  states  and  a  novel  subset  of  tissue-resident  memory  T  cells.  In  the  lower  airways  of  patients  with  asthma,  mucous  cell  hyperplasia is shown to stem from a novel mucous ciliated cell state, as well as goblet cell hyperplasia

--> a set of novel cell type claims. 2.4.6. Claims of novel cell types


he recent identification 74of  the  ionocyte  as  a  novel  airway  epithelial  cell-type4,5underscores  our  incomplete 75understanding  of  the  cellular  landscape  of  the  lung,  which  limits  our  insight  into  the 76mechanisms of respiratory disease, and hence our ability to design therapies for most lung 77disorders

--> That became super famous indeed.

e  identify  a  novel  tissue-resident CD4 T cell subset that harbors features of both circulating memory cells and of tissue-resident memory (TRM) cells


We  profiled  nasal  brushes, bronchial brushes, and airway wall biopsies (third to sixth generation) from healthy volunteers

 We  detected  multiple  basal,  club,  cili-ated, and goblet cell states, as well as type 1 and type 2 alveolar cells, and  the  recently  described  ionocyte



We  did  not  identify  specific  clusters  of  tuft  cells  or  neuro-endocrine cells. Supervised analysis using neuroendocrine (CHGA, ASCL1, INSM1, HOXB5)  and  tuft  (DCLK1, ASCL2)3  cell  marker  genes  identified  a  small  number  of  cells  with  neuroendocrine-like  features present only in lower airways (Extended Data Fig. 4)

--> Good reporting


The  two  basal  cell  states  corresponded  to  differ-entiation stages, with the less-mature basal 1 cell state expressing higher  levels  of  TP63  and  NPPC  compared  with  more-mature  basal 2 cells (Fig. 1f and Extended Data Fig. 1), which were more abundant in bronchial brushes, suggesting a more apical localiza-tion  (Fig.  1d,e).  Goblet  1  and  2  cells  were  both  characterized  by  high  expression  of  CEACAM5, S100A4  and  MUC5AC,  and  lack  of MUC5B  (Fig.  1f  and  Extended  Data  Figs.  1  and  4).  Goblet  1  cells  specifically  express  KRT4  and  CD36  (Fig.  1g  and  Extended  Data Fig. 4). Genes involved in recruitment of neutrophils, mono-cytes,  dendritic  cells,  and  T  cells5,  such  as  IDO1, NOS2, IL19, CSF3  (granulocyte-colony  stimulating  factor),  and  CXCL10  are  expressed  at  high  levels  in  goblet  2  cells  (Fig.  1f,g  and  Extended  Data  Fig.  4).

--> Some types to extract there


Macrophage  transcriptional  phenotypes  showed  large  donor  variation (Extended Data Fig. 5), but they all shared high expression of MARCO, CCL18, and genes involved in apolipoprotein metabo-lism (APOC1 and APOE) 

IgM+ (IGHM) B cells were enriched in the bronchial brushes and in the  lung  parenchyma,  while  IgG3+  (IGHG3)  B  cells  were  enriched  in airway biopsy samples


f, Dot plot depicting gene expression levels and percentage of cells expressing genes associated with lung phenotypes according to the OMIM database

--> Nice! Something to try and reproduce in - 3.1.4 Cell-Disease networks via Wikidata





# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q92826478)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q92826478)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q92826478/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q92826478&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41591-019-0468-5)  
