
A periodic table of cell types
==============================
  
  [@wikidata:Q93086975]  

# Highlights
Propose a ‘periodic table of cell types’ can be as a framework for distinguishing cell types from cell states, in which the different states of the same cell type are analogous to ‘isotopes’

Shape  has long been used as the dominant feature for defining the identities and functions of different cell types.

Concepts now include markers, cell surface proteins, secretion molecules, transcription factors, as well as cell functions and tissue enrichment.

Need for the a robust formal framework for the ‘cell type’ concept, the definition of a cell type based upon a few features or marker genes may not be sufficient.

In previous studies, the expression profile of TFs was good at distinguishing cell-type identities across multiple organs.

Cell state is a modular addition of a regulatory program to a CoRC (which defines the identity of the cell type.

TFs may be absent in in mature cells, making it difficult to classify. 

Cell types can be divided in 3 phases: stem cell; progenitor; differentiated phase.For each, we can have informative ‘milestone cell types’ for example hemangioblasts (HABs).

Cells (like fibroblasts) found in multiple tissues and/or organs may not be exactly the same. These differences represent different cell states.

Cell types from different lineages may have have similar functions (developmental homoplasy). Cells originating from different developmental trajectories may converge to identical CoRC-defined cell types. 


The periodic table of cell types would differ across species.The table should be taken as just a summary of our existing knowledge of cell types. 

# Comments

 "With such a periodic table of cell types, we can annotate each cell
type with biological information, including organ system, cell morphology, cell abundance and the composition of its epigenome and transcriptome."
<!-- You do not need a periodic table for that! -->


"Analogously, the periodic table of cell types could be used to predict a species’ missing cell types, based on the biological logic of development and differentiation."
<!-- I was not able to think of a possible prediction.  -->

In general, they present a tree-like structure with supra classifications. It is a calling for standardization, although the analogy with a periodic table is useful as a toy model, but misleading. To start, there is no periodicity and there is no table. 

Talks about a periodic table of C. elegans, but does not build it. 