
The evolving concept of cell identity in the single cell era
============================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q93086971]  

# Highlights

it remains challenging to precisely define cell identity, leading to renewed debate surrounding this concept

Here, I present three pillars that I propose are central to the notion of cell identity: phenotype, lineage and state

Fundamentally, though, no general method to accurately define cell identity currently exists. This represents a barrier to cataloging cell types in organisms where the full repertoire of cell identities remains unknown, such as in mouse (Han et al., 2018; Tabula Muris Consortium et al., 2018) and human (Regev et al., 2017).

(3) State – cell identity is stable; however, in response to diverse stimuli, the same cell type can exhibit a range of different phenotypes (states).

It was around this time that Ramón y Cajal

<!-- Cajal is always the beginning, cool. -->

Increasing the number of molecular features used to define cell types has enabled more systematic and unbiased assessments of cell identity, based on gene expression alone.

 <!-- Unbiased is way too strong. Everything is biased, specially in the absence of clear rules. -->

It is important to note here that cluster-specific gene expression is used to infer cell type, representing an initial prediction of identity that must be orthogonally validated.

 <!-- Great point. -->

tissue disruption and cell destruction, resulting in loss of spatial information that is valuable for cell type identification.

Ultimately, cell identity is best defined by function. One powerful method for investigating cell function involves the physical elimination of cells, followed by observation of any physiological or behavioral impact on the organism.

Where a cell type is exclusively marked by expression of a specific gene, genetic ablation is possible, as illustrated by the targeted expression of a toxin gene to selectively kill pancreatic acinar cells (Palmiter et al., 1987).

Assigning cell function to a previously undescribed cell type would require an intractable array of assays to be deployed. Therefore, how do we begin to explore the function of novel cell types?

The recent construction of high-resolution cell atlases of protein expression, based on immunostaining of 12,003 proteins across 56 human cell lines, is extremely valuable (Thul et al., 2017).

understanding the origins ofa cell’s identity, its developmental lineage, is a powerful and simple way to position a cell within a much more complex hierarchy. At a minimum, the new cell species can then be connected to its nearest relatives to provide further clues as to its role in the organism. Can, then, developmental origins alone provide sufficient information to define cell identity?

<!-- Maybe for some cases, but certainly not for all.  -->

Another limitation of relying on lineage to facilitate cell type identification is its deployment in the context of human development. How, in the absence of ground truth data that can be used to map lineage relationships, can we infer a meaningful and accurate cell developmental hierarchy?

A third and essential facet of cell identity is ‘state’, which can be described as the range of cellular phenotypes arising from the interaction of a defined cell type with its environment.

<!-- I like the use of "described" instead of "defined" -->

Cell identity can be thought of as ‘hard-wired’, although it is reprogrammable under defined conditions (as exemplified by Takahashi and Yamanaka, 2006). On the contrary, cell state can be thought of as ‘soft-wired’, where a given cell type can exist in a range of subtly different states, raising the issue of how cell identity and state can be distinguished for previously uncharacterized cell types.

To provide a direct measure of cell state potential, single cell clonal or lineage mapping can be applied to map the emergence of different cell states from a given cell identity.

<!-- There are also emergences of cell types from a state! Immune priming might lead to antibody class switch, a stable phenotype (identity) caused by a transient one.  -->

Overall, for each cell identity, we can attach to it the probability that it will exist in a given state under defined conditions, potentially revealing the molecular regulation underlying hard- wired cell identity and soft-wired cell state.

Is there a minimal set of observations that will serve to universally define cell identity across all cell types and organisms?

Once we have amassed a critical amount of information, will the landscape of cell identity be continuous or discrete? If cell identity can indeed exist as a continuum, this presents the opportunity to stabilize transient phenotypes and to create new cell identities, endowing known cell types with new functions. Through our continued efforts to define cell identity, we come closer to realizing these possibilities.

# Comments
