
alona: a web server for single cell RNA-seq analysis
====================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q93179879]  
  
Publication date : 23 of April, 2020  

# Highlights

The widespread
adoption of scRNA-seq has created a need for user-friendly software for data analysis. We have developed a
web server, alona that incorporates several of the most popular single-cell analysis algorithms into a flexible
pipeline. alona can perform quality filtering, normalization, batch correction, clustering, cell type annotation
and differential gene expression analysis. Data are visualized in the web browser using an interface based
on JavaScript, allowing the user to query genes of interest and visualize the cluster structure

--> Seems to be clogged (Queued datasets: 41 Running datasets: 0)

Here, we describe alona—a public, fully automated web service, with a core written in the Python 3 programing language—
that can be used to analyze, annotate and visualize scRNA-seq
data.

Results are visualized in the web browser using a light-weight JavaScript
library, which allows exploring cell clusters and gene expression
using simple interactions.

Cell type annotation. The method for cell type annotation was
described in Franze´n et al. (2019). Annotation of cell types is
performed at the cluster level. Cluster-level analysis is faster
than cell-level analysis since not every cell needs to be considered; it also reduces the impact of molecular dropout events and
cell doublet artifacts, which frequently contaminate scRNA-seq
data. Gene expression in clusters is represented by taking the median across all cells. The procedure estimates gene expression activity of a set of marker genes and then ranks the resulting cell
types. Significance is determined by computing a one-sided
Fisher’s exact test for each cell type and adjusting P-values with
the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure. An acceptable falsediscovery rate was chosen to be 10%. Thus, if the adjusted Pvalue is higher than 0.1, the cell type receives an ‘Unknown’ annotation. Custom marker genes can be entered or the user can
choose to simply use markers from PanglaoDB. The latter option
only supports mouse and human data. The present function is
implemented in adobo.bio.cell_type_predict.






# Comments

## Tags
3.1.1. PanglaoDB
2.7. The concept of "cell marker"
1.4.2. A focus on single-cell RNA sequencing
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q93179879)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q93179879)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q93179879/P921%3BP4510)  
