
Lipid-Associated Macrophages Control Metabolic Homeostasis in a Trem2-Dependent Manner
======================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q93137723]  
  
Publication date : 27 of June, 2019  

# Highlights
We describe a novel and conserved Trem2+ lipid-associated macrophage (LAM) subset and identify markers, spatial localization, origin, and functional pathways associated with these cells. Genetic ablation of Trem2 in mice globally inhibits the downstream molecular LAM program, leading to adipocyte hypertrophy as well as systemic hypercholesterolemia, body fat accumulation, and glucose intolerance.

Recently identified examples include regulatory T and B cells that interact with adipocytes (Feuerer et al., 2009, Nishimura et al., 2013), γδ T and natural killer T (NKT) cells that drive thermogenesis (Kohlgruber et al., 2018, Lynch et al., 2016), memory T cells protective against infection (Han et al., 2017), cytotoxic innate lymphoid cells (Boulenouar et al., 2017), dendritic cells and macrophages expressing the transcription factor PPARγ (Cipolletta et al., 2012, Macdougall et al., 2018, Odegaard et al., 2007), as well as macrophages forming “crown-like” structures around large adipocytes that are suggested to preserve tissue integrity in the face of massive adipocyte cell death (McNelis and Olefsky, 2014).

 In a subset of lipid-associated macrophages (LAMs) prominently arising under obesity conditions from circulating monocytes and positioned around enlarged adipocytes, Trem2 drives a gene expression program involved in phagocytosis, lipid catabolism, and energy metabolism. Single-cell RNA-seq of human adipose tissue shows that LAM cells as well as the Trem2 pathway are highly conserved. 

 epididymal visceral white adipose tissue (EAT)
We validated these findings on the protein level by flow cytometry, which confirmed the emergence of CD9+CD63+ macrophages during obesity, as predicted by single-cell RNA-seq (Figure S2E). In addition, immunofluorescence staining revealed that these CD9-expressing macrophages accumulated in crown-like structures surrounding adipocytes of HFD-fed mice (Figure 2F; Hill et al., 2018).

We next sought to explore whether LAM cells can be found outside of adipose tissue because this lipid metabolism signature is reminiscent of “disease-associated microglia” (DAM) found in the context of Alzheimer’s disease (Keren-Shaul et al., 2017). 

Together, these data indicate that Trem2 is a critical checkpoint for the response of adipose tissue myeloid cells to obese conditions and highlight its importance for macrophage remodeling, LAM cell formation, and the assembly of crown-like structures during obesity.

The gene signature we discovered in adipose tissue macrophages is highly similar to that found in DAM cells in the brains of mice and humans with neurodegenerative disease (Keren-Shaul et al., 2017), hepatic macrophages during obesity (Figures S4G and S4H), and in aortic macrophages during atherosclerosis (Cochain et al., 2018).

Our results underline the potential importance of Trem2 in adipose tissue macrophages for the prevention of adipocyte hypertrophy and regulation of systemic cholesterol levels. Given its recently appreciated centrality in Alzheimer’s disease (Guerreiro et al., 2013, Jonsson et al., 2013, Keren-Shaul et al., 2017, Ulland et al., 2017, Wang et al., 2015), numerous efforts are underway to pharmacologically stimulate TREM2 signaling. Our study highlights the possibility that harnessing TREM2 function might have beneficial effects in multiple disease contexts beyond neurodegeneration.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q93137723)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q93137723)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q93137723&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2019.05.054)  
