
Renal-Tubule Epithelial Cell Nomenclature for Single-Cell RNA-Sequencing Studies
================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q93115184]  
  
Publication date : 28 of June, 2019  

# Highlights

Ambiguous or redundant cell-type names would impede such mapping tasks. The solution to this problem is to create “controlled vocabularies”1,2 that can be preferentially used in reports of single-cell RNA-seq data and other types of -omic data at a single-cell level. In this review, we provide such a controlled vocabulary for the epithelial cells that make up the mammalian renal tubule. 

Our strategy here is to propose nomenclature that reflects the most common usage from 1988 to the present in each case. In this report, we not only describe preferred names for each cell type, but also include information on the percentage of each epithelial cell type in mouse kidney and on widely accepted mRNA/protein markers that are considered prerequisites for identification of individual cell types.

The mammalian renal tubule is made up of at least 14 segments, containing at least 16 distinct epithelial cell types.

 Here, we summarize recommended terminology for renal tubule epithelial cells derived from prior recommendations by the Renal Commission of the International Union of Physiologic Sciences and published in in Kidney International in 1988.3

 Before presenting the list of recommended cell-type terminology, we summarize, in a greatly simplified manner, the current procedures for mapping gene expression lists from single-cell RNA-seq to the various known cell types.

 The problem we are addressing in this review is that there is presently no generally accepted “controlled vocabulary” for renal tubule epithelial cell types, i.e., there is no standard list of acceptable terms. Consequently, terminology has been inconsistent among individual single-cell RNA-seq articles,10–26 and the correct mappings to functional and biochemical studies done in the pregenomic era are uncertain.

 <!--       - 2.4.2.3. Nomenclature of cell types -->

 Figure 1.
Renal tubule cell nomenclature. The scheme shows the connection of both a short-looped nephron and a long-looped nephron to the collecting duct system.

There are two sets of terms commonly used to describe proximal tubule cells. One divides the proximal tubule into three segments called S1, S2, and S3 on the basis of differences in morphology, topology, and location in the kidney.27,28 Functionally, the S2 is recognized as the segment responsible for para-aminohippurate secretion and, by implication, responsible for general organic anion and cation secretion.28 A limitation of this classification is the lack of a discrete transition from one to the other morphologically


 The macula densa consists of only 14–24 cells per nephron in rodent species,34,35 and so has been elusive in single-cell RNA-seq studies. In several recent studies using single-cell RNA-seq, clusters were labeled “loop of Henle cells.” This is an ambiguous label because it could apply to any of seven cell types discussed in this section. Thus, the term loop of Henle cells should generally be avoided in cluster labeling.

 Rabbits exhibit a distinct transition point at the end of the DCT that allow unambiguous dissection of a uniform DCT epithelium (Figure 2).39,40 Rodents, however, exhibit a transition region41 that includes cells expressing markers normally attributed to downstream segments, such as the three subunits of the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) (Figure 2). The DCT in human kidney also has such a transition region (Figure 2), leading investigators to divide the DCT into two subsegments, referred to as DCT1 and DCT2.41,42

s. For example, the thiazide sensitive NaCl cotransporter (Slc12a3) is well established to mediate the major function of the DCT cells, namely reabsorption of NaCl, and has been found to be expressed exclusively in DCT cells.36

In Supplemental Figure 2 and Supplemental Appendix 1, we show a set of additional markers found in RNA-seq studies of microdissected rat renal tubule segments6 (panel A) in combination with mouse single-cell RNA-seq14 (panel B). In theory, a combination of these markers can be used to specifically identify any renal tubule cell type.

In this review, we have provided a set of terms for each renal tubule epithelial cell type, recommended for use in cluster naming in single-cell RNA-seq studies.

hus, this single marker is considered necessary and sufficient to identify a DCT cell. Table 1 lists these sine-qua-non identifiers for the cell types described in this review, known before the invention of the RNA-seq technique. An important characteristic of such identifiers is that their mRNAs must be very abundant because (depending on the platform) single-cell RNA-seq does not always capture the full transcriptome of each cell (discussed by Clark et al.58) and it is important for discriminating markers to be detectible at their native expression levels. 

<!-- Presentation of markers in a gene-neutral fashion -->


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q93115184)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q93115184)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q93115184&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2019040415)  
