
A lineage-resolved molecular atlas of C. elegans embryogenesis at single-cell resolution
========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q93132926]  
  
Publication date : 05 of September, 2019  

# Highlights

The nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans has only 558 cells at hatching. Despite its limited cell number, however, C. elegans contains a wide diversity of cell types and a complex anatomy. Its cell lineage is invariant—every individual C. elegans animal is produced by the exact same sequence of cell divisions—and this lineage has been fully mapped. Together, these features make it an ideal animal in which to comprehensively describe the gene expression patterns of each cell and to define the transcriptome dynamics during cell differentiation and development.

In total, we identified 502 distinct terminal and preterminal cell types, which correspond to 1068 individual branches of the lineage tree.

Genes that distinguish sister cells are often
first coexpressed in the parent and then selec-
tively retained in one daughter but not the other.
This phenomenon, known as “multilineage
priming,” is notably prevalent throughout the
C. elegans lineage

4) In many cases, purely computational re-
constructi on of development al trajectories from
the single-cell transcriptomic data does not
accurately reproduce the known cell lineage.
Marker genes known to be expressed in spe-
cific lineages were critical for correct annota-
tion.Thisisparticularlyevidentforlineagesin
which gene expres sion changes rapidly

A combination of marker genes, lineage as-
signments, and developmental time allowed us to
locate 112 specific terminal anatomical cell types,
including every lineage i nput to BWM, every
distinct subtype of pharyngeal muscle (pm1-2,
pm3-5, pm6, pm7, and pm8) and hypodermis
(hyp1-2, hyp3, hyp4-6, hyp7, hyp8-11, seam, and
P cells), and every non-neuronal cell type in the
mesoderm. 

Fig. 2. Annotation of the early lineage. (A) (Top) Diagram showing the position of early mesoderm
(MS lineage) cells marked by expression of ceh-51. (Bottom) Lineage radiograph showing the
average fluorescent intensity (log
10
scaled) of a CEH-51: :GFP p rotein fusion measured by live
imaging. The inne r rings show the generation of the founder cells, AB (which produces almost
exclusively ectoderm and pharynx), MS (mesoderm and pharynx), C (muscle and ectoderm)
and P3, which gives rise to P4 (germ line) and D (muscle). Daughter cells are named by their
relative positions at mitosis (e.g., ABa is the anterior d aughter of AB, ABal is left daughter
of ABa).

--> Beautiful diagram

Fig. 2. Annotation of the early lineage. (A) (Top) Diagram showing the position of early mesoderm
(MS lineage) cells marked by expression of ceh-51. (Bottom) Lineage radiograph showing the
average fluorescent intensity (log
10
scaled) of a CEH-51: :GFP p rotein fusion measured by live
imaging. The inne r rings show the generation of the founder cells, AB (which produces almost
exclusively ectoderm and pharynx), MS (mesoderm and pharynx), C (muscle and ectoderm)
and P3, which gives rise to P4 (germ line) and D (muscle). Daughter cells are named by their
relative positions at mitosis (e.g., ABa is the anterior d aughter of AB, ABal is left daughter
of ABa).

hus, our data provide a quan-
titative portrait of Waddington’slandscape(46)
for a whole organism. However , the abruptness of
many cell fate decisions in C. elegans, with many
distinct terminal cell types b ecoming distin-
guished only in the final embr yonic cell divi-
sion, contrasts with the smooth landscape in
Waddington’s illustrations and warrants fur-
ther investigation.

We observe convergence of gene expression
patterns in many instances where distinct cell
lineages produce identical or related cell types.
Data from a recent atlas of mouse organogenesis
(13) suggests that this phenomenon is also preva-
lent in vertebrates. For example, myocytes in the
mouse atlas are produced by two convergent
trajectories, and excitatory neurons are produced
by several trajectories.



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q93132926)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q93132926)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q93132926/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q93132926&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.AAX1971)  
