
Extracellular vesicles or exosomes? On primacy, precision, and popularity influencing a choice of nomenclature
==============================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q93135668]  

# Highlights

A major focus of the recently updated guidelines of the
International Society for Extracellular Vesicles (ISEV) on
minimal information for studies of extracellular vesicles
(MISEV) is the need for appropriate (that is, informative
and effective) nomenclature in reporting extracellular
vesicle (EV) research [1]. The ISEV consensus recommendation on nomenclature is to use “extracellular vesicle” as the “generic term for particles naturally released
from the cell that are delimited by a lipid bilayer and
cannot replicate” and to modify “EV” based on clear,
measurable characteristics such as cell of origin, molecular markers, size, density, function, etc. [1]

94% endorsed the nomenclature recommendation. The other
6% were evenly split between disagreeing with the recommendation (i.e. the recommendation should be stricter,
less strict, or use terms other than EV) and preferring no
nomenclature recommendation

--> Approach useful for 2.4.4.2


. The first is the issue of characterization markers (such as specific proteins) that should be depleted in
a pure EV preparation compared with the cell of origin.
Here, the suggestion of our correspondents is that MISEV
is too strict, since some proposed “negative” markers like
GM130 or calnexin can be associated with some EVs and
may be detectable in an EV preparation. This criticism is
easily addressed, since it is based on a misreading or
misunderstanding. In fact, MISEV2018 relaxed the
recommendations of MISEV2014 [2] in this regard,
such that, while authors should give careful thought to
depletion of contaminants, there is no recommendation
for a universal negative marker

everal scientists we have corresponded with very much prefer the term “exosome” as
a generic alternative to “extracellular vesicle.” And, yes,
the nomenclature disagreement is almost always about
exosomes, not microvesicles, ectosomes, microparticles, or other terms. In some cases, we perceive an
almost emotional attachment to the term exosome, as
in the example of one person who told us several times
that they could not support MISEV as a matter of
“conscience.”


--> hahah that is cute


we would like to address some other reasons
that are put forward to support the use of exosome or
EV: chiefly, these are arguments about primacy, precision, and popularity.

--> These criteria are very important for 2.4.3

Primacy: the state of being first or most
important

Was “exosome” first used to describe EVs?
No. “Exosome” is first found in the biomedical literature in four articles that were published in PNAS from
1970 to 1973 [3–5]. By a strict application of temporal primacy (and we
would disagree with such an application), mobile DNA fragments should be the only use for “exosome”
today.


Was “exosome” or “extracellular vesicle” first used
to describe EVs?
To our knowledge, the first use of “extracellular vesicle” in the title of a scientific publication was in 1971 in
the Journal of Ultrastructure Research


 were observed in various animal sera
[24,25] and in tissue and milk of breast cancer patients
[26], and were called by names from “pequenas particulas” (little particles) to “extracellular microvesicles” to
“virus-like particles.”
De Tkaczevski LZ. “Pequenas particulas” observadas en
algunos seuros animales. Rev Soc Argent Biol. 1968;44
(1):19–27. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/4902747

--> Bien! Me hace feliz veer un trabajo dos hermanos en espanhol tendo reconocimiento


Precision: exactness, accuracy

What would the terms “exosome” and
“extracellular vesicle” mean to a non-specialist?
And do the terms have clear definitions for the
specialist?

The word “exosome” is formed from the Greek “exo”
(“outside”) and “soma” (“body”). What this term
means would not be clear to a non-specialist (e.g.
a biologist who does not study EVs) without further
explanation,

Popularity: being liked by many; fashionableness
Is exosome or EV better “liked”?

if evidence for this preference was
presented publicly (and we encourage presentation
of any available data), it is not at the moment
a compelling argument for us as academic scientists
to change our discourse

Indisputably, the term exosome is the most popular/
used in the recent biomedical literature. We observed
above, though, that exosome often does not refer to
the canonical exosome of MVB origin and is thus
diluted by many definitions (and in papers that in
many cases do not demonstrably involve EVs)

Experts … and expert consensus
Beyond overall popularity, scientific consensus is
a kind of “popularity” or “agreement” among established experts. Can we answer the question of
whether the established expert opinion has imbued
“exosome” or “extracellular vesicle” with legitimacy
as the best term for EVs in general? That is a difficult
question. Without doubt, MISEV2018 represents the
consensus of by far the largest group of EV experts
assembled to date as an author team, and in this
sense, “extracellular vesicle” is the expert consensus
for the general term.

. Of course, this undisputed fact
must be balanced against the many authors who use
different definitions of “exosome” individually

The term “extracellular vesicle” or “EV” has now been
agreed on by the international community as the consensus generic term for lipid bilayer-delimited particles
released from the cell [1].

--> Thus, platelets are EVs! Well, and stricly, all cells, as they are shed by dividing cells.


When authors choose not to follow the consensus, we
can only recommend, in the spirit of a previous letter
to the editor [49], that terms other than EV are clearly
defined at each use.

--> Good reccommendation. IMO they should always define key terms, preferably via stable identifiers.

# Comments


Boundary of exosome and a cell
## Tags
2.3
# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q93135668)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q93135668)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q93135668/P921%3BP4510)  
