
Applying knowledge-driven mechanistic inference to toxicogenomics
=================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q94590849]  
  
Publication date : 06 of May, 2020  

# Highlights
Several mechanisms of cellular toxicity can be predicted using a vector representation of semantic knowledge graph concepts.

We present an innovative mechanistic inference framework (MechSpy), which can be used as a hypothesis generation aid to narrow the scope of mechanistic toxicology analysis. 

In the case of in vitro toxicology studies involving gene expression assays (also referred to as “transcriptomics”), the simplest approach is to take the results of differential transcriptomics analysis and seek GO concept enrichment to gain clues of the underlying biological behavior of the treated cells.

However, this output results in a list of possibly related biological pathways that are not necessarily tailored to the study's domain (e.g. toxicology). Moreover, current pathway enrichment strategies don't take into account the sequential order in which the experimentally-significant expression changes occur.

The idea of computationally-generated explanations is not new, as Schank (Schank, 1986) proposed a framework for this in 1986. At that time, the breadth of scope and lack of computational power resulted in explanation patterns remaining mostly as a theoretical exercise. However, we now have the tools to make it possible. Here we present MechSpy, a computational framework (Fig. 1) to produce mechanistic hypotheses of toxicity from in vitro assays.

MechSpy uses a directed graph representation of our current knowledge of molecular biology and biochemistry.

The KG included concepts from the Gene Ontology (Ashburner et al., 2000; The Gene Ontology Resource, 2019), Protein Ontology (Natale et al., 2017), Cell Ontology (Cell Ontology, 2012), Human Phenotype Ontology (Köhler et al., 2019), Human Disease Ontology (Schriml et al., 2012), and Chemical Entities of Biological Interest (Hastings et al., 2016)

The ELK reasoner (Kazakov et al., 2011; Kazakov et al., 2014) was utilized to deductively close the KG (Fig. 1.b). ELK was specifically designed for Web Ontology Language EL profiles, easily handles reasoning of large ontologies, utilizes multiple processors, and leverages a consequence-based reasoning engine enabling it to derive inferences over ontology class hierarchies, object properties, and instances of ontology classes. 

. Using the non-deductively-closed version of the KG, for each of the top-three ranked mechanisms, MechSpy searched for paths connecting the most significant genes at each time point j with each of the mechanism steps. 

 Fig. 4 presents an example narrative generated for liver cells exposed to a 400μM dosage of diclofenac sodium for up to 24 h, for which “ATP depletion due to calcium homeostasis disruption” (M2) was predicted as one of the most likely mechanism of toxicity.

 <!-- cool stuff! -->
natural next step to this work will be to seek enrichment from other types of time series than from gene expression data, and to use instead (or in combination with) nascent transcription, proteomics and metabolomics assays at matching time points. We could also apply MechSpy to a proper semantic representation of existing AOPs from AOPwiki or Effectopedia (Aladjov, 2019), rather than high-level molecular mechanisms of toxicity. Therefore, an integration between MechSpy and the AOP Ontology (Burgoon, 2017) would also be desirable to explore.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q94590849)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q94590849)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q94590849&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TIV.2020.104877)  
