
A single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-Seq toolbox for fresh and frozen human tumors
==================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q94671894]  
  
Publication date : 11 of May, 2020  

# Highlights

Here, we have developed a systematic toolbox for profiling fresh and frozen clinical tumor samples using scRNA-Seq and snRNA-Seq, respectively. We analyzed  216,490  cells  and  nuclei  from  40  samples  across  23  specimens  spanning  eight  tumor  types  of  varying  tissue  and  sample characteristics.

--> Damn, that is a lot of cells.

The tumor types span the following characteristics: different cells of origin (for example, epithelial, neuronal), solid and non-solid, patient ages and transitions (for example, primary, meta-static).

We  included  samples  from  non-small  cell  lung  carci-noma  (NSCLC),  metastatic  breast  cancer  (MBC),  ovarian  cancer,  neuroblastoma, glioblastoma (GBM), pediatric high-grade glioma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), pediatric sarcoma and mela-noma (Fig. 1b). In total, we analyzed 216,490 cells and nuclei across 23 tumors, from 22 patients spanning 40 sample preparations. We provide a comprehensive analysis summary for each sample tested in a dedicated website (https://tumor-toolbox.broadinstitute.org).

For  dissociation,  we  selected  enzymatic  mixtures  for  process-ing fresh tissues based on the specific characteristics of each tumor type, such as cell type composition and ECM components, literature review and experience from processing similar human or mouse tis-sues. For example, to break down collagen fibers in breast cancer15,16we used Liberase TM (see Methods), whereas to break down ECM in  GBM17  we  used  papain  (cysteine  protease)

For  dissociation,  we  selected  enzymatic  mixtures  for  process-ing fresh tissues based on the specific characteristics of each tumor type, such as cell type composition and ECM components, literature review and experience from processing similar human or mouse tis-sues. For example, to break down collagen fibers in breast cancer15,16we used Liberase TM (see Methods), whereas to break down ECM in  GBM17  we  used  papain  (cysteine  protease)

Different    cell    composition    recovered    by    scRNA-Seq    and    snRNA-Seq.  We  compared  scRNA-Seq  and  snRNA-Seq  by  test-ing matching samples from the same specimen each in neuroblas-toma

In  both  neuro-blastoma  and  MBC,  immune  cells  were  much  more  prevalent  in  scRNA-Seq,  and  parenchymal  (especially  malignant)  cells  were  much  more  prevalent  in  snRNA-Seq.

We  provide  computational  pipelines  for  extensive  QCs  at  https://github.com/klarman-cell-observatory/HTAPP-Pipelines,    and    all    laboratory  protocols  are  provided  in  detailed  form  in  the  open  access platform protocols.io.

# Comments

CC-BY :)

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q94671894)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q94671894)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q94671894/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q94671894&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41591-020-0844-1)  
