
Broad-coverage biomedical relation extraction with SemRep
=========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q94917474]  
  
Publication date : 14 of May, 2020  

# Highlights
In this paper, we present an in-depth description of SemRep, an NLP system that extracts semantic relations from PubMed abstracts using linguistic principles and UMLS domain knowledge. 

A strict evaluation of SemRep on our manually annotated dataset yields 0.55 precision, 0.34 recall, and 0.42 F1 score. 
A relaxed evaluation, which more accurately characterizes SemRep performance, yields 0.69 precision, 0.42 recall, and 0.52 F1 score

SemRep extracts a range of predicates relating to clinical medicine (e.g. TREATS, DIAGNOSES, PROCESS_OF), molecular interactions (e.g., INTERACTS_WITH, INHIBITS,STIMULATES), disease etiology (e.g., ASSOCIATED_WITH, CAUSES, PREDISPOSES), pharmacogenomics (e.g., AFFECTS, AUGMENTS, DISRUPTS), as well as static relations (ISA,
PART_OF, LOCATION_OF)

An offshoot of SemRep, named SemGen [42, 43], focused on genetic relations (such as ASSOCIATED_WITH, STIMULATES, INHIBITS) and was supported by the ABGene gene
recognition system 

Due partly to its roots in the PUNDIT system [51], SemRep is implemented in Prolog logic programming language. 
With release 1.8, we are phasing out this implementation and plan to implement future releases
using Java

We use MetaMap with the 2006AA UMLS Metathesaurus USABase dataset by default, due to the prevalence of concept ambiguity in the later UMLS releases [41]
and SemRep’s optimized conceptual and relational modifications for said release (though, the most recent UMLS dataset is available as an option).

Domain extensions to SemRep enable extraction of semantic relations in specific domains under-represented in the UMLS (e.g., disaster information management [35]). These extensions were later incorporated into unified SemRep as processing options (e.g.-domain disaster for disaster information management).

Coordination processing

Two NPs are compatible only if one of the following conditions apply:
• They are semantically compatible. The semantic types associated with their semantic heads belong to the same semantic group [62] in the UMLS Semantic Network (i.e.,
coarse-grained semantic classes, such as Disorders or Drugs & Chemicals) . 
• They have the same head word.
• They are both relational nouns. SemRep currently uses a list of 151 relational nouns,
which includes application, analysis, and synthesis.

We currently do not address more complex cases of coordination, such as verbal/clausal
coordination (e.g., Infections can trigger GBS and exacerbate CIDP.) and coordination
ellipsis (e.g., the male and the female genital tract).


In the SemRep ontology, we use a subset of the 55 relations in the UMLS Semantic Net-
work. 

We redefined five relations (ASSOCIATED_WITH, DISRUPTS, INTERACTS_WITH,
OCCURS_IN, PROCESS_OF), added seven new relations (ADMINISTERED_TO, AUGMENTS,
COEXISTS_WITH, CONVERTS_TO, INHIBITS, PREDISPOSES, STIMULATES), and expanded
Kilicoglu et al. BMC Bioinformatics          (2020) 21:188 Page 12 of 28
13 relations with respect to their ontological predications (AFFECTS, CAUSES, COM-
PLICATES, DIAGNOSES, LOCATION_OF, MEASURES, METHOD_OF, PART_OF, PRECEDES,
PREVENTS, PRODUCES, TREATS, USES), while excluding 30 relations (e.g., ANALYZES,
ADJACENT_TO, BRANCH_OF). In all, 25 relations (excluding ISA and comparative predi-
cates) are used in the SemRep ontology.

For descriptions of all predicates and examples in which they apply, see the Appendix in Kilicoglu et al. [15]

Ontological predication: Disease or Syndrome-CAUSES-Disease or Syndrome
SemRep output: Urinary tract infection-CAUSES-Pyelonephritis

Incorporating sortal anaphora resolution with predication generation

If the anaphora is a case of set-membership anaphora, we generate multiple predication


Before: Pharmaceutical Preparations-TREATS-Pulmonary
arterial hypertension
• After: Epoprostenol-TREATS-Pulmonary arterial
hypertension

In the second evaluation, we assessed SemRep on a standard benchmark corpus. We
considered the CDR corpus [1], developed for the BioCreative V CID task and manu-
ally annotated for chemical-induced disease relationshi

With the current availability and high performance of constituent and dependency
parsers (e.g., Stanford CoreNLP [121]), an important question is whether SemRep should
use such a parser instead of its shallow parsing approach, which could simplify some of
the analysis steps at the expense of processing speed. However, we did not find evidence
that the shallow parsing approach was a significant source of SemRep errors; therefore,
we plan to continue using shallow parsing as the primary syntactic analysis approach.


Our evaluation also reveals shortcomings in our test collection, even when we put aside
the annotation errors and its relatively small size. Relation annotation against the entire
UMLS Metathesaurus is extremely difficult given its size (more than 4M concepts in the
2019AB release). This difficulty is exacerbated by the need to keep the test collection
up-to-date with each UMLS release, which requires significant resources.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q94917474)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q94917474)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q94917474/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q94917474&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/S12859-020-3517-7)  
