
Cells and gene expression programs in the adult human heart
===========================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q95602396]  
  
Publication date : 05 of April, 2020  

# Highlights

we characterise the adult human heart cellularlandscape covering six anatomical cardiac regions (left and right atria and ventricles, apex and  interventricular  septum)

Further wedefine the complexity of the cardiac vascular network which includes clusters of arterial,capillary, venous, lymphatic endothelial cells and an atrial-enriched populatio

the large size of cardiomyocytes      (length/width: ~100/25μM) limits the unbiased capture of single cells requiring analyses ofsingle nuclei transcriptomics to ensure a comprehensive approach

4 normal hearts (sevenfemales, seven males) of North American and British organ donors (ages 40-75 years;

 45,870 cells, 78,023 CD45+    enriched cells and 363,213 nuclei. Overall clustering of nuclei and cells revealed ten majorcoarse-grained cell types based on canonical markers: atrial cardiomyocytes (aCM),ventricular cardiomyocytes (vCM), fibroblasts (FB), endothelial cells (EC), pericytes (PC),smooth muscle cells (SMC), immune (myeloid, Myel; lymphoid, Lym), adipocytes (Adi) and neural cells (NC)


The cell distributions were generally similar in tissues of male and female hearts, but left ventricular regions (AX, SP, LV) from female donors had significantly higher meanpercentages of CM (46.7±12%) compared to male donors (33.9±10%;​p​-value=0.008)
 Thisis unexpected given the average smaller heart mass of women and may reflect the small  donor pool. If replicated, these data may explain higher cardiac stroke volume in women​6and lower rates of cardiovascular disease. 

--> Illustrating gender differences in tissues and types!  - 2.4.7.1 Differentia for cell classes: biological sex 

CM are responsible for generating the contractile force of the heart, and are the most       abundant cell type in the LA, RA, RV and all LV regions captured by single nuclei profiling.

Of 10,228 genes expressed among all CM, 389 genes showed >3-fold higher expression in  aCM

--> Cool

Clustering of vCM data identified five subpopulations (​Figure 2A​), with variable proportionsin LV, AX, SP and RV, indicative of inter-chamber heterogeneity. vCM1 and vCM2                        constituted the majority of CM (~70-80%). Subpopulation vCM1 comprised ~60% of vCMacross all left ventricular sites, but only 33% of RV (

 --> a lot of analysis for - 2.4.7.5 Differentia for cell classes: sub-organ regions
 

 We identified​six subpopulations of aCM, indicating considerable heterogeneity (​Figure 2B​)particularly between the right and left chambers. Notably,​HAMP​, a master regulator of ironhomeostasis, was significantly enriched in over 50% of RA CM compared to 3% LA CM(​Supplementary Table B4​)​

Figure 3:​Stromal cells of the human heart. A.Visualization of transcriptional data fromvascular and mesothelial cells by UMAP.

Myeloid cells represented around 5% of the total cardiac cells and comprised eight distinctsubpopulations (​Figure 4A​andSupplementary Figure E1A​), characterised by well-definedgene markers (​Supplementary Table E1​).

Schematic of the interaction between skeletalmuscle and PRG4+FB mediated by type I collagen (COL1A2) and a10b1 integrins, andPRG4+ FB with S100A12+ monocytes mediated by CXCR4_CXCL12. The cell-cellinteractions between the repair populations in the heart and skeletal muscle are verydifferent. Created with BioRender ®.

We expect that our results will allow further insights into other cardiac disease processes.   Going forward, our results will furthermore be of value for deconvolution of existing bulktranscriptomic  data, for transfer learning in analyses of other cardiac regions (valves,papillary muscle, conduction system), and to enable interpretation of the cellular responsesto human heart disease. All of our data can be explored at ​www.heartcellatlas.org​.   

--> Uses cellxgene too. It seems that .h5ad and cellxgene is becoming the _de facto_ standard

# Comments

Very nice, comprehensive set of cell types! Deep study, I like it so much.

Great visualization too. Nice and detailed author contributions

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q95602396)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q95602396)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q95602396/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q95602396&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.03.024075)  
