
Standardizing the standards
===========================
  
  [@wikidata:Q95815991]  
  
Publication date : 21 of February, 2006  

# Highlights
The nice thing about standards is that there are so many tochoose from.Andrew S Tannenbaum


# Comments

 recent  paper  by  Nove`reet  alextends  the  reportingstandards  notion  beyond  the  experimental  world,  to  thedescription  of  quantitative  models  of  biochemical  systemsand attempts to reconcile some of the various standards thathave  evolved. The  Minimum  Information  Requested  In  theAnnotation of biochemical Models (MIRIAM) standard pro-posed by this group is an attempt to bring together CellML(Lloydet al, 2004) and SBML (Finney and Hucka, 2003; Huckaet al, 2003) and to gain acceptance from databases that archivemodels  to  provide  access  to  these  in  a  standard  machine-readable format. This is an ambitious, but important, goal assystems biology hopes to produce quantitative models of cellsand cellular processes. 


 Even in MAGE-ML, we havefound  that  XML’s  flexibility  can  allow  two  conflicting  butcompletely ‘correct’ descriptions of the same experiment.To address this problem, Wanget al(2005) suggest the use ofthe semantic web and its reference-document format (RDF;http://www.w3.org/RDF). Unlike XML, which has an inher-ently hierarchical structure, in RDF ‘everything is a resourcethat  connects  with  other  resources  via  properties.

Is this the solution we are all waiting for? Well, not really. Asthe authors point out, constructing useful RDF descriptionsrequires  a  standard  ontology—standardized  descriptions  ofobjects,  elements,  and  processes  using  controlled  vocabul-aries. And although in the first instance, this might seem to bea  solvable  problem  across  all  of  the  diverse  experimentaldomains  trying  to  develop  standards,  the  proliferation  ofdisparate medical ontologies within the singular practice ofmedicine suggests that standardizing ontologies will not be aneasy task.

But what is the real solution to this problem? The answer ispretty simple: money. 

--> that was worth a good honest laugh (it is a good point!)


What is remarkable about all of thesestandards, including MIAME, is that they have largely beendeveloped  through  grass-roots  efforts  by  ‘concerned  stake-holders’ who want to assure that the data they are generatingand managing are useful. 
This is ‘blue collar’ science—it ishard,  often  thankless  work,  and  nobody  is  going  to  win  aNobel  prize  for  creating  a  standard  for  describing  how  amicroarray was hybridized or how a sample was injected intoa mass spec.
And because it  is not  glamorous, hypothesis-driven   research,   funding   to   support   developing   thesestandards  or  better  yet,  bringing  them  together,  has  beenlimited and slow in coming.
 But this is something we should allbe concerned about. After all, the work of any one of us buildson  that  of  those  who  have  preceded  and  using  that  priorknowledge  effectively  is  one  of  the  things  that  will  helpaccelerate the overall rate of scientific discovery
  I, for one, amthankful  to  those  who  are  developing  and  implementingstandards  (my  involvement  in  MGED  notwithstanding)  andsupportive of efforts to fund their work. 

After all, a rose by anyother name is still a rose; you just cannot find it in the database

--> Nice! Good X.1 - Phrase to quote on 2.4.4.2. Names for different classes of types

## Tags


3.10 Minimal Information About New Cell Classes

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q95815991)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q95815991)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q95815991/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q95815991&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/MSB4100052)  
