
Openness and trust in data-intensive science: the case of biocuration
=====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q96307475]  
  
Publication date : 10 of June, 2020  

# Highlights

 In the life sciences, biological data- and knowledge bases managed by expert biocurators have become crucial for data-intensive research. In this paper, I will use the case of biocurators to argue that openness and transparency will not diminish the need for trust in data-intensive science.

 
 Another factor is the belief that the data will speak for itself through computational analyses without the need for prior theories, models or hypotheses (Kitchin 2014). Although the claims of a new and “theory-free” science generating knowledge from Big Data have been questioned by both scientists and philosophers of science (e.g., Kitchin 2014; Leonelli 2016), there are still enough changes taking place to warrant the label “data intensive” science.

 As Richard Horton, editor-in-chief of the scientific journal The Lancet, argues, something seems to be wrong with the way science is currently conducted:

    The case against science is straightforward: much of the scientific literature, perhaps half, may simply be untrue. Afflicted by studies with small sample sizes, tiny effects, invalid exploratory analyses, and flagrant conflicts of interest, together with an obsession for pursuing fashionable trends of dubious importance, science has taken a turn towards darkness

--> That is strong! 

. Biological databases have become central for biological research (Kersey and Apweiler 2006; Leonelli 2013) and these databases are usually populated and managed by expert biocurators. In this paper, I will use the example of biocurators to argue that data-intensive science requires not a dismissal, but a reconfiguration of scientific trust

Robert Merton’s famous account of the scientific ethos includes organized skepticism (Merton 1942) 


However, as philosopher John Hardwig argues in “The Role of Trust in Knowledge” (Hardwig 1991), trust is not only necessary in science; it might be even more epistemically important than empirical data and logical arguments. 

Data is now considered a valuable scientific output beyond its original cause for production



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q96307475)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q96307475)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q96307475/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q96307475&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/S11019-020-09960-5)  
