
Cell Atlas of The Human Fovea and Peripheral Retina
===================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q96576585]  
  
Publication date : 17 of June, 2020  

# Highlights
, we used single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) to analyze the transcriptomes of
~85,000 cells from the fovea and peripheral retina of seven adult human donors. Utilizing computational
methods, we identifed 58 cell types within 6 classes: photoreceptor, horizontal, bipolar, amacrine,
retinal ganglion and non-neuronal cells. Nearly all types are shared between the two retinal regions, but
there are notable diferences in gene expression and proportions between foveal and peripheral cohorts
of shared types


--> "cohorts", "cohorts"! That is new to me.

Many are expressed in striking cell class-, type-, or regionspecifc patterns. Finally, we compared gene expression signatures of cell types between human and the
cynomolgus macaque monkey, Macaca fascicularis. We show that over 90% of human types correspond
transcriptomically to those previously identifed in macaque, and that expression of disease-related
genes is largely conserved between the two species


n each region, we characterized the six classes of retinal cells – photoreceptors,
horizontal cells, bipolar cells, amacrine cells, RGCs and Müller glial cells (Fig. 1b) and found molecular signatures
that divided them into a total of 62 (fovea) or 70 (periphery) cell types


 We identifed the fve neuronal classes (9,070 photoreceptors, 2,868 horizontal
cells, 25,908 bipolar cells, 13,607 amacrine cells and 11,404 RGCs) as well as four types of non-neuronal cells:
19,896 Müller glia, 1,149 astrocytes, 671 microglia and 409 vascular endothelial cells.
Classifcation and identifcation of retinal cell types. We next re-clustered each neuronal class separately to discriminate cell types. We obtained a total of 54 clusters, each corresponding to a putative cell type or
possibly a small group of closely related types: 3 photoreceptor, 2 horizontal cell, 12 bipolar cell, 25 amacrine cell,
and 12 RGC types

In macaques, ON and OFF bipolars are characterized by
expression of genes that encode the metabotropic glutamate receptor 6, GRM6, and the kainate-type glutamate
receptor, GRIK1, respectively; rod bipolars are distinguished from cone bipolars by expression of PKCα, encoding
protein kinase Cα12. Tese expression patterns were conserved in human bipolars, allowing us to divide 12 bipolar clusters into 1 ON rod, 5 ON cone, and 6 OFF cone types (Fig. 2g–i)


Conservation of type-specifc marker genes between human and macaque

--> 2.4.4.2. Names for different classes of types

d) Expression patterns of class-specifc markers (rows) in
individual cells (columns). Cells are grouped by their classes (color bars, top). Plot shows data from a maximum
of 500 randomly selected cells per class

--> 3.1. Cell-type markers in Wikidata

Figure 4. Non-neuronal cell types. (a) Visualization of four non-neuronal types using t-SNE. (b) Genes
diferentially expressed between Müller glia and astrocytes. Genes shown exhibited >1.5 log fold change.

We used the cell atlas to assess retinal expression
of 1,756 genes associated with diseases


Figure 8. Expression of disease-related genes in retinal cell classes. (a-l) Heat maps show expression of genes
implicated in each of 12 groups of blinding diseases described in the text. Color represents the scaled expression
level of genes among all cell classes. Tus, the heat maps accurately refect the order of expression among cell
classes for each gene but not the absolute levels of expression. Asterisks mark genes that were included because
of clinical interest but fell below the threshold noted to the text.


by documenting close similarities between human retinal cell types and the macaque types we described
recently12, we both validate the use of this non-human primate model and point out some important diferences
that will need to be considered in interpreting studies of non-human primates. Although some diferences could
result from imperfections in gene and transcript annotation, it is likely that the vast majority are genuine.

--> 2.4.4.2. Names for different classes of types

Together, our results ofer new insights into many rare and common retinal diseases, and may contribute to a
more comprehensive understanding of their pathogenesis and the discovery of novel therapeutic targets.

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q96576585)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q96576585)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q96576585/P921%3BP4510)  
