
Structural cells are key regulators of organ-specific immune responses
======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q96952470]  
  
Publication date : 01 of July, 2020  

# Highlights

However, immune functions are not unique to haematopoietic cells, and many other cell types display basic mechanisms of pathogen defence3,4,5. To advance our understanding of immunology outside the haematopoietic system, here we systematically investigate the regulation of immune genes in the three major types of structural cells: epithelium, endothelium and fibroblasts. We characterize these cell types across twelve organs in mice, using cellular phenotyping, transcriptome sequencing, chromatin accessibility profiling and epigenome mapping. 


To investigate the regulation of immune genes in structural cells, we performed multi-omics profiling of endothelium, epithelium and fibroblasts from 12 mouse organs (brain, caecum, heart, kidney, large intestine, liver, lung, lymph node, skin, small intestine, spleen and thymus).


Fig. 1: Multi-omics profiling establishes cell-type-specific and organ-specific characteristics of structural cells.

. Structural cells were purified with an organ-independent sorting scheme that comprised the endothelium marker CD31 (encoded by Pecam1), the epithelium marker EpCAM (Epcam) and the fibroblast marker GP38 (encoded by Pdpn, also known as podoplanin) (Extended Data Fig. 1a, b)

We also observed the expected expression patterns for various cell-type-specific marker genes, but with a high degree of transcriptional heterogeneity across organs (Extended Data Fig. 3c, Supplementary Table 2). Notably, the expression profiles of structural cells within the same organ were globally more similar to each other than structural cells of the same type across organs (Fig. 1d, e, Extended Data Fig. 3d), which suggests that the tissue and organ environment has a major effect on the transcriptomes of structural cells.


Fig. 2: Gene expression of structural cells predicts cell-type-specific and organ-specific crosstalk with haematopoietic immune cells.


In spleen endothelium (highlighted here because of its strong transcriptional response to LCMV infection), treatment with IFNγ and IL-6 explained a sizable proportion of the LCMV-induced changes 

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q96952470)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q96952470)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q96952470&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41586-020-2424-4)  
