
The Minimum Information about a Molecular Interaction Causal Statement (MI2CAST)
================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q97063807]  
  
Publication date : 30 of June, 2020  

# Highlights

Here, we propose a checklist that accommodates current representations, called the Minimum Information about a Molecular Interaction CAusal STatement (MI2CAST). 
This checklist defines both the required core information, as well as a comprehensive set of other contextual details valuable to the end user and relevant for reusing and reproducing causal molecular interaction information.

Causal interactions describe interacting biomolecules involved in processes where the state of one biomolecule is affected by the state of another biomolecule. 

In parallel, the Gene Ontology [GO (Ashburner et al., 2000)], since 2003, has included a ‘regulation of biological process’ (GO:0050789) branch that has been widely used to annotate causal interactions (Balakrishnan et al., 2013), and has recently been extended into the GO Causal Activity Models (GO-CAM) framework (Thomas et al., 2019).

An exhaustive list of entity classes that can be part of causal statements is provided in Figure 2, together with recommendations of comprehensive and widely used ontologies and CVs to describe them. For instance, if the source entity is a known ‘mRNA’, it is recommended to use an ‘Ensembl transcript’ identifier.

 <!-- Or just use Wikidata for all of them :)  -->

The type of evidence for declaring and annotating a causal statement must be provided. 

In the latter case, multiple identifiers can be recorded. When the evidence type is an experiment, the annotation can either be at the less specific level (e.g. experimental evidence, ECO:0000006) or as specific as possible (e.g. a yeast 2-hybrid evidence used in manual assertion, ECO:0005805). The type of evidence should be specified with terms from the Evidence & Conclusion Ontology [ECO (Giglio et al., 2019)].

In MI2CAST, the biological type of an entity corresponds to its biological nature, such as gene, RNA, protein and complex. The biological type of an entity is usually defined indirectly, by the identifier provided by the database that aims to list all entities of a certain type (see Supplementary File S3).

The Cell Ontology [CL (Bard et al., 2005; Diehl et al., 2011)] or BRENDA are recommended to capture the cell type. The Cellosaurus (Bairoch, 2018) or BRENDA are recommended to specify the cell line.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q97063807)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q97063807)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q97063807&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTAA622)  
