
Cell Types Promoting Goosebumps Form a Niche to Regulate Hair Follicle Stem Cells
=================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q97557008]  
  
Publication date : 15 of July, 2020  

# Highlights

Th arrector pilimuscle and thesympathetic neuron form a dual-component niche that regulates hairfollicle stem cells—the sympatheticneuron regulates stem cells directly withnorepinephrine via synapse-likestructures, whereas thearrector pilimuscle maintains sympatheticinnervation to stem cells. Through thesethree connected cell types, coldstimulates not only goosebumps but also stem cell activation.

--> Cool. Everything is "species-neutral", though. Overstating?

Second, what are the cellular and molecular mechanisms
by which sympathetic nerves regulate hair growth? Third, given
that APMs are part of this tri-lineage unit, is there a role for APMs
in regulating hair growth?

Here, we address these questions by combining cell-typespecific gene deletion

n the skin, the sympathetic innervation together with the arrector pili muscle (APM) (mesenchymal origin) and the hair follicle
(epithelial origin) form a tri-lineage unit (Figure S1A


basal sympathetic nerve activity is required for HFSC activation and anagen entry but dispensable for APM maintenance


en that sympathetic nerve fibers were intertwined with
APMs, we next sought to determine whether APMs are essential
for maintaining sympathetic innervation to HFSCs. To this end,
we generated a transgenic mouse model in which both the
YFP reporter and the diphtheria toxin receptor (DTR) are expressed under the smooth muscle actin (SMA) promoter (SMAYFP-DTR mouse, Figure 5A).

Our data established that APMs and sympathetic innervation
form a dual-component niche to regulate HFSC activity. The
sympathetic nerve secretes norepinephrine to modulate HFSC
activity directly, whereas APMs maintain sympathetic nerveHFSC interactions

The anatomical connection between APMs and HFSCs
is conserved across mammals, raising the possibility that there
might be evolutionary advantages to preserving this anatomical
connection beyond goosebumps. We find that cell types
enabling goosebumps form a dual-component niche for HFSCs:
a supporting component (the APM) and a signaling component
(the sympathetic nerve), with the former maintaining the latter.


--> That is a rather large jump. It would be called "speculation" in other contexts.

APMs are often lost in the scalp skin of people with androgenetic alopecia (common baldness) (Torkamani et al., 2014; Yazdabadi et al., 2012). It is possible that in such skin, loss of APMs
leads to the loss of sympathetic nerves, making HFSCs more
difficult to activate. Our results also suggest the potential of using selective b2 agonists to promote HFSC activation.

--> Too quick to jump into a suggestion. Nice results, but we need studies in humans.

The sympathetic nerve is known to influence melanocyte stem
cells (MeSCs), a distinct stem cell population also located
around the bulge that regenerates the pigment to color the
hair (Zhang et al., 2020). Hyperactivation of sympathetic neurons, as occurs in severe stress, depletes MeSCs, forming
the basis for stress-induced hair graying. There are several
interesting differences regarding how the sympathetic nerve
regulates MeSCs versus HFSCs. First, HFSCs are more sensitive to low levels of sympathetic nerve activity than MeSCs.


# Comments

NO SPECIES MENTION IN THE ABSTRACT that is absurd. All paper is mostly in mice, with little things here and there on human-derived cells.


## Tags
1.4.4. Types of knowledge about cell types


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q97557008)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q97557008)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q97557008/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q97557008&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+workhttps://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q97557008/P921%3BP4510)  
