
A single-cell transcriptomic atlas characterizes ageing tissues in the mouse
============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q97569253]  
  
Publication date : 15 of July, 2020  

# Highlights

To gain a better insight into these processes, here we generate a single-cell transcriptomic atlas across the lifespan of Mus musculus that includes data from 23 tissues and organs.


Using single-cell transcriptomic data, we assessed cell-type-specific manifestations of different hallmarks of ageing—such as senescence3, genomic instability4 and changes in the immune system2.

We performed single-cell RNA sequencing on more than 350,000 cells from male and female C57BL/6JN mice belonging to six age groups, ranging from 1 month (the equivalent of human early childhood) to 30 months (the equivalent of a human centenarian)

--> Human centenarian might be too much

Data from the 3-month time point—which has previously been published and constitutes the Tabula Muris5—represents approxi-mately 20% of the cells in the entire dataset, and was used as a basis from which to perform semi-automated cell-type annotation of the data from the additional time points 

. All the automated cell annotations were reviewed and approved by human experts, and the remaining cells were annotated by hand, creating one of the largest manually curated single-cell tran-scriptomic resources in existence. 

--> Cool.

The Tabula Muris Senis enables the discovery of ageing-related changes in specific cell types. 

he cellular composition of each tissue type tends to vary with age. We investigated changes in the cellular composition of tissues for which data from at least three time points was available (Supplementary Table 5).

he decline of the endothelial population suggests that bladder ageing in mice might be associated with lower organ vascularization, which is consistent with recent findings26,27 and with the observed downregulation of vasculature-associated genes Htra1 and Fos (Fig. 2f, Supplementary Table 6).


n the spleen, the proportion of T cells decreases with age while the relative amount of plasma cells increases (Fig. 2i). This is supported by the upregulation of B cell and plasma cell marker genes (Cd79a and Jchain (also known as Igj)

 How-ever, when co-staining with Il1b, we found that the number of cells expressing both Clec4f and Il1b increased with age (Extended Data Fig. 6h–j).

  LSECs have been found to have a reduced endocytic capacity in aged livers, and it has been suggested that LSECs proliferate after injury or that bone-marrow-derived LSEC progenitors are recruited to the liver. This suggests that changes in the gene signatures of LSECs with age are closely linked with the function of these cells in immune response.

Finally, we computed an overall diversity score to identify which cell types were more susceptible to changes with age (Extended Data Fig. 10)

--> That is cool

The Tabula Muris Senis is a comprehensive resource for the cell  biology  community  that  offers  a  detailed  molecular  and  cell-type-specific portrait of ageing. 


# Comments

Aging example is a strong case for 2.4.4.2.4 The technotype

## Tags


1.4. The challenges of the Human Cell Atlas


1.4.4. Types of knowledge about cell types


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q97569253)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q97569253)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q97569253/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q97569253&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
