
A Single-cell Atlas of the Human Healthy Airways
================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q98162195]  
  
Publication date : 29 of July, 2020  

# Highlights
 A total of 77,969 cells were collected at 35 distinct locations, from the nose to the 12th division of the airway tree

  It reveals differential gene expression between identical cell types (suprabasal, secretory, and multiciliated cells) from the nose (MUC4, PI3, SIX3) and tracheobronchial (SCGB1A1, TFF3) airways. By contrast, cell-type–specific gene expression is stable across all tracheobronchial samples

  --> The second statement is a consequence of the method

  We also report the association of KRT13 with dividing cells that are reminiscent of previously described mouse “hillock” cells and with squamous cells expressing SCEL and SPRR1A/B.

  Each  donor  was  sampled  4-5  times  in  different  regions  of  upper (nose)  and  lower  airways  (tracheal,  intermediate,  distal  bronchi),

All    data    (hg19    and    hg38)    can    be    accessed    through    our    interactive    web    tool: https://www.genomique.eu/cellbrowser/HCA/.   Stromal   and   immune   cells   represented respectively 4.7% and 6.2% of all cells (Figure 1E  

--> Very cool visualization tool, cooler than cellxgene.

We  grouped  club  and  goblet  cells  as  “secretory  cells”  since  these  two populations  could  not  be  clustered  separately  and  essentially  differed  by  the  level  of expression of MUC5AC and MUC5B (Figure E4) (12


. The suprabasal, secretory and multiciliated clusters each comprised a sub-cluster of cells that could only be detected in nasal samples. These clusters were labelled “Suprabasal N”, “Secretory N” and “Multiciliated N” and will be described later in  the  manuscript. 

--> Nose and airways; 2.4.7.5 Differentia for cell classes: sub-organ regions

We  annotated  4  stromal  cell  types  (Figure  E8A),  found  only  in  biopsies,  especially  in  the intermediate samples (Figures E8B and E8C), including endothelial cells, expressing high levels of ACKR1,  fibroblasts,  expressing  high  levels  of FBLN1,  as  well  as  smooth  muscle  cells, characterized by high levels of desmin (DES) and high activity of the HOXA4 regulatory unit


Intriguingly,  dissociated  nasal  cells  appeared  larger.  There  was  a  proximo-distal  gradient  of cell size, with the largest average size in the nose (12.56 μm ± 0.71) and the smallest size in the distal airways (8.77 μm ± 0.71) (Figure E10E). This difference correlated with the number of detected genes and UMIs (Figures E2A and E2B).

--> That is cool.

 This result supports our previous  description  of  goblet  cells  as  precursors  of  multiciliated  cells  in  homeostatic  and healthy  epithelium  and  additionally  suggests  that  transition  through  this  stage  may  have slightly distinct dynamics between nasal and tracheobronchial epithelia (12


. However, this did not prevent us from defining stable core cell type signatures for each epithelial, stromal and immune cell types, irrespective of their anatomical location. In contrast, important variations of gene expression were found when comparing  the  same  populations  of  suprabasal,  secretory  and  multiciliated  cells  from  the surface epithelium between nasal and tracheobronchial compartments. These results fit well with  previous  work  reporting  differential  gene  expression  signatures  between  nasal  and bronchial  brushings  (5,  35).  Interestingly, SIX3, PAX6-7,  and OTX1/2,

A  focus  on  secretory  cells  demonstrates  that  nasal  cells  contain  few SCGB1A1+-  and SCGB3A1+- cells. Despite this low secretoglobin content, they display the core gene signature of  secretory  cells,  suggesting  that  secretoglobins  may  not  be  sufficient  marker  genes  to identify all secretory/club cells. These differences are important to consider when using nasal samplings as a proxy to assess bronchial status.

Our atlas sheds some light on two novel cell types, namely the multiciliating-goblet and the undefined  rare  cells.  Since  the  two  populations  were  also  found  in  pig  trachea  ((12)  and unpublished data), we are convinced of the validity of these two cell categories.

--> Cool, using pig data as an extra validation. Implying 2.4.4.2.1 The cell archetype


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q98162195)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q98162195)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q98162195/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q98162195&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1164/RCCM.201911-2199OC)  
