
Guidelines for human gene nomenclature
======================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q98148417]  

# Highlights

Here, we present the current HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC) guidelines for naming not only protein-coding genes but also RNA genes and pseudogenes, and we outline the changes in approach and ethos that have resulted from the discoveries of the past few decades.

The first guidelines for human gene nomenclature were published in 1979 (ref. 1), when the Human Gene Nomenclature Committee was originally established.

The philosophy of the HGNC used to be that gene nomenclature should evolve with new technology and that symbol changes, if supported by most researchers working on a gene, would be considered if they reflected new functional information.

The stability of gene symbols, particularly those associated with disease, is now a key priority for the HGNC. Nevertheless, novel information can be encapsulated in the gene name without changing the gene symbo

We strongly advise researchers to contact
us at hgnc@genenames.org whenever they are considering naming a novel gene or renaming an existing gene or group of genes, for all locus types, not just protein-coding genes.

For many years, the HGNC has maintained the definition of a gene as “a DNA segment that contributes to phenotype/function. In the absence of demonstrated function, a gene may be characterized by sequence, transcription or homology.” Because there is still no universally agreed-upon alternative, we continue to use this definition.

--> Very limited definition. It seems to refer to individuals (a particular molecule of DNA) and to classes at the same time. Kind of punning.

Box 1 | Summary of the guidelines
1. Each gene is assigned a unique symbol, HGNC ID and descriptive name.
2. Symbols contain only uppercase Latin letters and Arabic numerals.
3. Symbols should not be the same as commonly used abbreviations.
4. Nomenclature should not contain references to any species or ‘G’ for gene.
5. Nomenclature should not be offensive or pejorative.
Ideally,

Putative bicistronic loci may be assigned separate symbols to represent the distinct gene products (for example, PYURF, ‘PIGY upstream reading frame’, is encoded by the same transcript as PIGY, ‘phosphatidylinositol glycan anchor biosynthesis class Y’).
754

Gene names
Must be written in American English

--> Wow, that sucks. I am embarassed for you. That excludes the whole non-english-speaking world as out of standard.

Genes of unknown function that fit none of the above criteria are designated by the chromosome of origin, with the letters ‘orf’ for open reading frame (in lowercase to prevent confusion between the letter ‘O’ and the numeral ‘0’, which may be part of the chromosome number) and a number in a series (for example, C3orf18,
‘chromosome 3 open reading frame 18’)


Box 3 | Scenarios that may merit a symbol change

- Adoption of a more appropriate or commonly used alias
Adoption of a more appropriate or commonly used alias. For example, RNASEN was updated to DROSHA (drosha ribonuclease III) because of overwhelming community usage.
• Domain- or motif-based nomencla- ture. For example, TMEM206 (trans- membrane protein 206) is now PACC1 (proton activated chloride channel 1).
• Phenotype- or disease-based nomenclature. For example, CASC4 (cancer susceptibility candidate 4) was renamed GOLM2 (golgi membrane protein 2), removing reference to the phenotype and making it consistent with its paralog GOLM1.
• Location-based nomenclature. For example, TWISTNB (TWIST neigh- bor) is now POLR1F (RNA polymerase I subunit F).
• Pejorative symbols. For example, DOPEY1 was renamed to DOP1A (DOP1 leucine zipper like protein A).
• Misleading or incorrect nomencla- ture. For example, OTX3 was initially erroneously named as an OTX fam- ily member and has been renamed DMBX1 (diencephalon/mesencepha- lon homeobox 1).
• Symbols that affect data handling and retrieval. For example, all symbols that autoconverted to dates in Microsoft Excel have been changed (for example, SEPT1 is now SEPTIN1; MARCH1 is now MARCHF1); tRNA synthetase symbols that were also common words have been changed (for example, WARS is now WARS1; CARS is now CARS1).
locus

--> If symbols are not really stable, they cannot be the sole standard in an article. That will be always confusing. PanglaoDB used gene symbols that were changed, that was a pain in the ass. They are important, but must be chaperoned by a stable id. 

A small number of genes are currently
pseudogenized in the reference genome but are known to have coding alleles segregating in the population. Such loci are given the locus type ‘protein-coding’ and are indicated by ‘(gene/pseudogene)’ included at the end of the gene name (for example, CASP12, ‘caspase 12 (gene/pseudogene)’)

Nomenclature updates Although we are committed to minimizing symbol changes, some updates will still be appropriate. All requests for change are considered on a case-by-case basis and often involve community consultation. We anticipate that most future changes will fall into one of the following categories.

# Comments

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q98148417)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q98148417)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q98148417/P921%3BP4510)  
