
Human fetal microglia acquire homeostatic immune-sensing properties early in development
========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q98175996]  
  
Publication date : 01 of July, 2020  

# Highlights

Single-cell gene expression and bulk chromatin profiles of microglia at
9 to 18 gestational weeks (GWs) of human fetal development were generated. Microglia were
heterogeneous at all studied GWs. Microglia start to mature during this developmental period and
increasingly resemble adult microglia with CNS-surveilling properties. Chromatin accessibility
increases during development with associated transcriptional networks reflective of adult microglia.
Thus, during early fetal development, microglia progress toward a more mature, immune-sensing
competent phenotype, and this might render the developing human CNS vulnerable to environmental
perturbations during early pregnancy.

In human embryos, shortly after the closure
of the neural tube, amoeboid ionized calcium-
binding adaptor protein 1–positive (IBA1 pos )
microglia appear at gestational week (GW) 4.5

iamidino-2-phenylindole–negative, DRAQ5-
positive (DAPI neg DRAQ5 pos )] human fetal
microglia (CD11B pos CD45 int ) that were isolated
by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)
of CNS tissue from 23 early to mid-gestation
(GW9 to -18) fetuses after elective pregnancy
termination

Microglia are heterogeneous during human
fetal development and exhibit an activated,
phagocytic gene expression profile

All microglia clusters expressed canonical
microglia markers CSF1R and CX3CR1

(A) UMAP of 15,782 cells and 16 clusters depicted with size
(percentage of total cells in a specific cluster) and annotation (20 fetal samples;
n = 1 to 4 per GW)

State 1 contained mainly GW9 to -11 mi-
croglia, whereas state 7 largely consisted of
GW12 to -18 microglia (Fig. 4D), which is
consistent with the GW-associated clusters
(fig. S4B). State 1–enriched genes were asso-
ciated with microglia development (24), microg-
Kracht et al., Science 369, 530–537 (2020)
31 July 2020
lia activation and phagocytosis (19, 20), and
glycolysis (13, 25)

Microglia are the CNS-resident myeloid cells
and are critical for brain development and
later tissue homeostasis (
  
Here, the transcriptomic profile and chro-
matin organization of human fetal microglia
during early to mid-gestation (GW9 to -18)
development are presented. In contrast to
microglia in the healthy adult CNS (34), we
found that fetal microglia are highly hetero-
geneous. They progressively mature from GW13
onward, which is regulated by the activity of
increasingly complex gene regulatory networks,
and they already display functional properties
characteristic o

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q98175996)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q98175996)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q98175996&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.ABA5906)  
