
ImmunoGlobe: enabling systems immunology with a manually curated intercellular immune interaction network
=========================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q98300753]  
  
Publication date : 10 of August, 2020  

# Highlights

Each cell node is linked to the official cell ontology catalog in order to provide an objective/accepted definition of each cell type. All protein cytokines and effector molecules also include a link to UNIPROT. Nodes specific to mouse or human are noted in the Species Specificity column.

 Tools to explore the immune network are critical for better understanding the multi-layered processes that underlie immune function and dysfunction, but require a standardized network map of immune interactions. To facilitate this we have developed ImmunoGlobe, a manually curated intercellular immune interaction network extracted from Janeway’s Immunobiology textbook.

 <!-- Very similar to what I intended originally for my PhD project -->

ImmunoGlobe is the first graphical representation of the immune interactome, and is comprised of 253 immune system components and 1112 unique immune interactions with detailed functional and characteristic annotations. Analysis of this network shows that it recapitulates known features of the human immune system and can be used uncover novel multi-step immune pathways, examine species-specific differences in immune processes, and predict the response of immune cells to stimuli. ImmunoGlobe is publicly available through a user-friendly interface at www.immunoglobe.org and can be downloaded as a computable graph and network table.

To construct a comprehensive immune interaction network, we manually curated the 2799 immune interactions (edges) published in Janeway’s Immunobiology [18], widely regarded as an essential and comprehensive immunology text [17]. The data in this textbook is derived directly from the research literature, and focuses on physiologic functioning of the immune system rather than rare or atypical phenomena that may result from some experimental setups.

ImmunoGlobe is a directional immune interaction network that was constructed by manually codifying immune interactions described in the Janeway’s Immunobiology 9e textbook. a Schematic showing information recorded for each interaction.

  Definitions of the edge types can be found in Note S2. ImmunoGlobe thus provides a visual catalog of directional interactions between immune components and is available as an interactive network for download (File S1) and online at www.immunoglobe.org.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q98300753)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q98300753)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q98300753&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/S12859-020-03702-3)  
