
Systems biological assessment of immunity to mild versus severe COVID-19 infection in humans
============================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q98394258]  
  
Publication date : 11 of August, 2020  

# Highlights


Single-cell transcriptomics
revealed a lack of type I IFNs, reduced HLA-DR in the myeloid cells of patients with severe COVID-19,
and transient expression of IFN-stimulated genes.

1. We used
mass cytometry to assess immune responses to
SARS-CoV-2 infection in 52 COVID-19 patients,
who were confirmed positive for viral RNA by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and 62 ageand gender-matched healthy controls distributed between the two cohorts

To characterize
immune cell phenotypes in PBMCs, we used a
phospho-CyTOF panel that includes 22 cell
surface markers and 12 intracellular markers
against an assortment of kinases and phosphospecific epitopes of signaling molecules and
H3K27ac—a marker of histone modification
that drives epigenetic remodeling

--> noiiiice

We next used manual gating to identify 25
immune cell subsets (fig. S2) and determined
whether there were changes in the frequency
or signaling molecules of innate immune cell
populations consistent between the two cohorts

(B) Representation of mass cytometry–
identified cell clusters visualized by t-SNE in two-dimensional space. The box
plots on the bottom show frequency of plasmablasts (CD3−
, CD20−
, CD56−
,
HLA-DR+
, CD14−
, CD16−
, CD11c−
, CD123−
, CD19lo, CD27hi, and CD38hi) and effector
CD8 T cells (CD3+
, CD8+
, CD38hi, and HLA-DRhi) in both cohorts.

--> I wonder if they used the markers for computational gating or are ad hoc checked for clusters.

Single-cell transcriptional response
to COVID-19 infection
To investigate the molecular and cellular processes that lead to the distinctive inflammatory program, we used cellular indexing of
transcriptomes and epitopes by sequencing
(CITE-seq) and profiled the gene and protein expression in PBMC samples of COVID-19–
infected individuals. Cryopreserved PBMC samples from a total of 12 age-matched subjects
in the Atlanta cohort (five healthy controls and
seven COVID-19 patients; Table 2) were enriched for DCs, stained using a cocktail of 36
DNA-labeled antibodies (table S2), and analyzed
using droplet-based single-cell gene expression profiling approaches (Fig. 4A)

Fig. 4. Early, transient ISG expression in COVID-19 infection. (A) A schematic representation of DC enrichment strategy used in CITE-seq analysis.
scRNA-seq, single-cell RNA-seq. (B) UMAP representation of PBMCs from all
analyzed samples (n = 12), colored by manually annotated cell type

we analyzed the datasets from the two experiments
together without batch correction

Next, we calculated the per-cell quality control (QC)
metrics (fig. S9), differentially expressed genes
(DEGs) in each cluster compared with all other
cells (fig. S10 and table S4)), and the abundance
of DNA-labeled antibodies in each cell (fig. S11).

We observed several clusters that were primarily identified in COVID-19–infected individuals, including a population of plasmablasts,
platelets, and red blood cells and several populations of granulocytes. Notably, we detected
clusters of T cells and monocytes that were
characterized by the expression of interferonstimulated genes (ISGs) such as IFI27, IFITM3,
or ISG15 (see C11-C MONO_IFN and C18-T_IFN
in fig. S10). These IFN response–enriched clusters emerged only in samples from COVID-19
patients (fig. S12).

We then analyzed these DEGs with overrepresentation
analysis using blood transcriptional modules
(BTMs) (22) to better understand which immune pathways are differentially regulated in
patients with COVID-19.

Notably, with the exception of modest levels
of IFN-g expression in T and NK cells, we could
not detect any expression of IFN-a and -b genes,
which is consistent with the functional data
demonstrating impaired type I IFN production by pDCs and myeloid cells (Fig. 2). However, there was an enhanced expression of ISGs
in patients with COVID-19 (Fig. 4D) in spite of
an impaired capacity of the innate cells in the
blood compartment to produce these cytokines

--> What is activating the cells, then? 

In addition to an enhanced ISG signature,
the CITE-seq analysis revealed a significant
decrease in the expression of genes involved in
the antigen-presentation pathways in myeloid
cells (Fig. 4C and fig. S13). Consistent with this,
we observed a reduction in the expression of
the proteins CD86 and human leukocyte antigen class DR (HLA-DR) on monocytes and
mDCs of COVID-19 patients, which was most
pronounced in subjects with severe COVID-19
infection

. Notably, the receptor for S100A12, AGER (RAGE), was expressed sparsely in PBMCs (fig. S18), which
suggests that the target of EN-RAGE action
was likely to be elsewhere—perhaps the lung,
where RAGE is known to be expressed in type
I alveolar epithelial cells and mediate inflammation (24)

--> especulation, circunstantial evidence

In contrast to robust activation of B and T
cells, we observed a significant decrease in the
frequency of pDCs. Furthermore, mTOR signaling in pDCs was reduced significantly in
COVID-19–infected individuals, as measured
by decreased pS6 signaling by mass cytometry. These results suggest that pDCs, the primary producers of type I IFNs, are impaired in
COVID-19 infection, which is consistent with
studies in SARS-CoV infection.


Table S4
Raw data of CITE-seq analysis. Tab 1 shows the expression of top 100 genes in each cell cluster defined by CITE-seq analysis. 



# Comments

## Tags
1.4.2. A focus on single-cell RNA sequencing


# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q98394258)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q98394258)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q98394258/P921%3BP4510)  
 * [ScienceOpen](https://www.scienceopen.com/search#('v'~3_'id'~''_'isExactMatch'~true_'context'~null_'kind'~77_'order'~0_'orderLowestFirst'~false_'query'~'Systems%20biological%20assessment%20of%20immunity%20to%20mild%20versus%20severe%20COVID-19%20infection%20in%20humans'_'filters'~!*_'hideOthers'~false))  
