
Severe COVID-19 Is Marked by a Dysregulated Myeloid Cell Compartment
====================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q98563108]  
  
Publication date : 05 of August, 2020  

# Highlights

Dysfunctional HLA-DRloCD163hi and HLA-DRloS100Ahi CD14+ monocytes in severe COVID-19
•
Emergency myelopoiesis with immature and dysfunctional neutrophils in severe COVID-19

Severe COVID-19 was marked by occurrence of neutrophil precursors, as evidence of emergency myelopoiesis, dysfunctional mature neutrophils, and HLA-DRlo monocytes. Our study provides detailed insights into the systemic immune response to SARS-CoV-2 infection and reveals profound alterations in the myeloid cell compartment associated with severe COVID-19.


Activated HLA-DRhiCD11chiCD14+ monocytes were increased in patients with mild COVID-19, similar to patients with SARS-CoV-2 negative flu-like illness (“FLI”).

Their migration within the PBMC fraction on a density gradient marked these cells as low-density neutrophils (LDNs).


 Thus, an alternative activation pattern of classical monocytes appeared to be COVID-19-specific and was associated with severe disease. Besides activated lymphocytes, monocytes also upregulate CD69 expression (Davison et al., 2017), which promotes tissue infiltration and retention (Cibrián and Sánchez-Madrid, 2017). Similarly, CD226 expression on alternatively activated monocytes might also promote diapedesis and tissue infiltration (Reymond et al., 2004). Together, this activation pattern may contribute to the reduction of circulating monocytes in COVID-19.

  In contrast, decreased expression of HLA-DRA and HLA-DRB1 in severe COVID-19 is evident early on and sustained over time.

  Accordingly, pro- and pre-neutrophils were enriched for transcriptional signatures of neutrophil progenitors derived from published single-cell data (Figure 4C) (Pellin et al., 2019; Popescu et al., 2019), and pro-neutrophils in clusters 4 and 6 showed the highest proportion of cells with a proliferative signature (Figure S4B). Clusters 0, 1, and 2 (originally in cluster 4 in Figure 2A) expressed mature neutrophil markers FCGR3B (CD16) and MME (CD10) (Figure S4A).
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q98563108)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q98563108)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q98563108&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2020.08.001)  
