
A community-based transcriptomics classification and nomenclature of neocortical cell types
===========================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q98665291]  

# Highlights

To capitalize on these new methods, we propose the adoption of a transcriptome-based taxonomy of cell types for mammalian neocortex. 

This classification should be hierarchical and use a standardized nomenclature. 

It should be based on a probabilistic definition of a cell type and incorporate data from different approaches, developmental stages and species. 

A community-based classification and data aggregation model, such as a knowledge graph, could provide a common foundation for the study of cortical circuits.

<!-- KG reference -->

This community-based classification, nomenclature and data aggregation could serve as an example for cell type atlases in other parts of the body.

Essential to this effort is the clear definition of cell type, normally understood as cells with shared phenotypic characteristics.

Classifications of cortical cell types: from Cajal to the Petilla Convention


Towering historical figures proposed classifications of cortical cells based on their morphologies as visualized with histological stains4,8,9 (Fig. 1a–c).

A community effort to classify neocortical inhibitory cells was attempted at the 2005 Petilla Convention, held in Cajal’s hometown in Spain, and led to a common standardized terminology describing the anatomical, physiological and molecular features of neocortical interneurons.

In principle, many criteria can be used, including:
 - (i) anatomical or connectivity-based features
 - (ii) parametrization of intrinsic electrophysiological properties
 - (iii) combination of structural and physiological criteria
 - (iv) molecular markers
 - (v) developmental origins
 - (vi) epigenetic attractor states
 - (vii) evolutionary approaches identifying homology across species

Ideally, these classifications should converge and agree, or at least substantially overlap.

Current methods  have the potential to approach the complete, accurate and permanent (CAP) criteria cited by Brenner as the gold standard in biological science51
.

A molecular definition of cell types allows the identification of cell-type markers and the creation of genetic tools to target, label and manipulate specific cell types,thereby providing the means to standardize datasets obtained by different researchers.

Transcriptomics also enables comparing cell types across organs, as different organs use similar genes.
Thus, it could be used to classify all the cells in the body with a single method and framework.

<!-- This overlooks many important non-transcriptome based classification methods -->

Recent work in the retina is promising in this regard, where a large body of work has established a highly diverse set of anatomically, physiologically and functionally discrete cell types and where transcriptomic clusters strongly correlate with this prior knowledge.

One possible explanation is that long-range connectivity patterns are set up early in development and may not be strongly reflected in adult gene expression.
However, such mismatches do not negate the value of a core transcriptomic classification as described above. 
Rather, this information about developmental trajectories needs to be incorporated into the transcriptomic cell type classification.

A particular advantage of a
transcriptomic classification is that it provides a direct avenue for quantitative comparative analysis by aligning cell types across species based on shared gene covariation, enabling an ‘Ur-classification’ as a common denominator of basic cell types

Such similarities and
differences between cell types across species, as well as challenges created by graded or developmental variations in features, could also be better captured by a probabilistically defined and hierarchically organized cell-type taxonomy.

Prematurely adopting an inflexible definition of types will obscure the significance of observed phenotypic variability and its biological interpretation. Rather, a plausible way forward is to employ a practical or operational quantitative definition of a cell type.

However, one requires community consensus on a rigorous statistical definition of transcriptomic types and the description of intra- and inter-type variability.

One natural approach to represent a transcriptomic taxonomy is to adopt a hierarchical framework. Cluster analysis is well suited to this, as its connectivity-based methods generate a tree-like representation of clusters.

--> Explicitly argues for trees! Not good. 
.

Another advantage of casting the cell type classification as a cladistic one is that the lumping–splitting tension maps itself naturally as a distinction between different levels of the hierarchical tree, since one can split a group into subgroups at a lower level of the hierarchy to reflect data obtained in different physiological or developmental conditions.

--> It really seems that multiple inheritance is implicitly considered.

But hierarchical transcriptomic relationships may not be easily represented as a simple tree-like structure. 
Rather, they may have complex inclusion–exclusion and class relationships and may be more amenable to graph-based or other set-theoretic constructions.

--> Nice. However, the simple leap to multiple inheritance has not been made, at least not yet.

Names are important: as an old Basque proverb states, ‘izena duen guzia omen da’ or ‘that which has a name exists’, and a similar Chinese one says ‘the beginning of wisdom is to call things by their right names’

--> Limitation of names is ancient, but perhaps too ancient.

Creation of such an ontology is a serious project in data organization that can build on prior efforts in cell ontologies as well as best practices established by the ontology development community (see Open Biomedical Ontology Foundry, http://www. obofoundry.org).

The benefits of creating a unified reference ontology across these biological axes will be large, but it will be a serious community effort to design a system that can accommodate them

Nomenclature also poses a challenge. 
Currently, the lack of standardized nomenclature makes it difficult to track and relate cell types across different studies. 
One natural idea with a genetically based paradigm is to name cell types on the basis of the best defining genes for each cell type, as is currently commonly done. 

The traditional way of naming cell types is by their anatomical features (such as chandelier, double-bouquet, basket, Martinotti, pyramidal cells), and it would be desirable to incorporate these short and widely-used names into a nomenclature when possible, to seek consistency with the vast literature on neocortical cell types. 

In addition to cell types, higher-order classes (for example, caudal ganglionic eminence (CGE)-derived GABAergic interneurons, GABAergic interneurons, neurons) could be named as well, and both types and classes would be matched across species at the level (type, class) at which they can be aligned.

<!-- A bit of confusion on what a type and what a class is -->

A more flexible way to organize our knowledge and understanding of cell types would be as a living, updatable framework, one allowing reference, query and inference. 

One example of an appropriate data structure for such a community platform is a ‘knowledge graph’, a widely used tool in the tech industry and computer science as a platform for data aggregation.

<!-- Exactly what I am doing with Wikidata
      - 1.3.2.1. Cell-type-oriented knowledgebases
    - 1.4.5. Goals of this project
  - 1.3. Knowledge Representation in biology:
 -->

With a probabilistic or Bayesian definition, each new cell will be assigned a probability of belonging to a particular type in the graph. 
Second, the graph can be manually or automatically updated, following conventional optimization algorithms, as new data can change node identities and distances with respect to one another. 
The proposed cell-type knowledge framework would represent a living and updatable resource that maintains an actively derived and flexible ontology of cortical cell types, benefitting from present active ontology efforts.

The classification, nomenclature and associated knowledge graph could be managed by a committee of experts representing the breadth of approaches and disciplines in the field.

<!-- Not best. Doesn`t scale well, Wikidata-like systems scale much better (I think) -->

Regardless of who supports and maintains this key infrastructure, it is critical that the efforts be managed through open communication with the community.

In addition, we propose that the community input to support this taxonomy and enable its future revisions be channeled into an open platform, a knowledge graph, as is becoming increasingly common in community-led data science.

# Comments
