
Using logical constraints to validate information in collaborative knowledge graphs: a study of COVID-19 on Wikidata
====================================================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q99196713]  
  
Publication date : 30 of August, 2020  

# Highlights

Urgent global research demands real-time dissemination of precise data. Wikidata, a
collaborative and openly licensed knowledge graph available in RDF format, provides
an ideal forum for exchanging structured data that can be verified and consolidated
using validation schemas and bot edits. I

f a given knowledge graph against a set of predetermined criteria (Amith
et al., 2018). There are several possible approaches to evaluating a knowledge graph based
on external information (so-called extrinsic evaluation), including comparing its structure
to a paragon ontology, comparing its coverage to source data, applying it to a test problem
and judging the outcomes, and manual expert review of its ontology (Brank, Grobelnik &
Mladenic, 2005). Different systematic approaches have been proposed for the comparison
of ontologies and knowledge graphs, including NLP techniques, machine learning,
association rule mining, and other methods (Lozano-Tello & Gomez-Perez, 2004; Degbelo,
2017; Paulheim, 2017). T

We implement these constraints with SPARQL and test them on
Wikidata using the public SPARQL endpoint of this knowledge graph, available at https://
query.wikidata.org

Thus, Wikidata forms a continuously growing, single, unified network graph, with 99M items forming the nodes, and 1706M statements forming the
edges as of July 20, 2022. A live SPARQL endpoint and query service, regular RDF/JSON
dumps, as well as linked data APIs and visualization tools, establish a backbone of
Wikidata uses (Malyshev et al., 2018; Nielsen, Mietchen & Willighagen, 2017).

 Also,
since the edit history is available to anyone, tracing human and non-human contributions,
as well as detecting and reverting vandalism is available by design and relies on community
management (Pellissier Tanon & Suchanek, 2019) as well as on software tools like ORES
(Sarabadani, Halfaker & Taraborelli, 2017) or the Item Quality Evaluator (https://itemquality-evaluator.toolforge.org/). Wikidata’s quality is overall high, and has been a topic of
a number of studies already (e.g., Piscopo & Simperl, 2019; Shenoy et al., 2022).

In addition to their multilingual set of labels and descriptions, Wikidata properties are
assigned object types using wikibase:propertyType relations (blue in Fig. 2). These
relations allow the assignment of appropriate objects to statements, so that non-relational
statements cannot have a Wikidata item as an object, while objects of relational statements
are not allowed to have data types like a value or a URL (Vrandečić & Krötzsch, 2014).

Despite the importance of these statements defining properties, property constraint
(P2302) relations (brown in Fig. 2) are the semantic relations that are primarily used for
the validation of the usage of a property.

In 2019, Wikidata announced the adoption of the Shape Expressions language (ShEx) as
part of the MediaWiki entity schemas extension (https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/
Extension:EntitySchema). 

For those familiar with XML, ShEx is analogous
to XML Schema or RelaxNG. SHACL (Shapes Constraint Language), another language
used to constraint RDF data models, uses a flat list of constraints, analogous to XML’s
Schematron. SHACL was adapted from SPIN (SPARQL Inference Notation) by the W3C
Data Shapes working group in 2014 and became a W3C recommendation in 2017

These issues can be resolved using tools for the automatic enrichment of Wikidata like
QuickStatements (cf. Turki et al., 2019) or adjusted one by one by active members of
WikiProject COVID-19.

The missing
statements found by such tasks can be integrated in Wikidata using a bot based on
Wikidata API and Wikidata Query Service to ameliorate the completeness and integrity of
available mortality data for epidemics, mainly the COVID-19 pandemic (Turki et al.,
2019).


The scope of rule-based methods
can be similarly expanded to cover other competency questions such as non-redundancy
(conciseness) through the proposal of other logical constraints to tackle them, such as a
condition to find taxonomic relations to trim in a knowledge graph (examples can be
found at https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:Database_evaluation).

A ShEx ShapeMap is a pair of a triple pattern for
selecting entities to validate and a shape against which to validate them. This allows for the
definition of the properties to be used for the items of a given class (Prud’hommeaux,
Labra Gayo & Solbrig, 2014; Waagmeester et al., 2021) and property constraints and
relations based on the meta-ontology (i.e., data skeleton) of Wikidata

More generally, ontology-based and knowledge graph-based
software tools have the potential to provide wide data and platform interoperability, and
thus their semantic interoperability is relevant for a range of downstream applications such
as IoT and WoT technologies (Gyrard, Datta & Bonnet, 2018).

We look
forward to extending our proposed approach to allow knowledge graphs to handle nonrelational statements about future epidemics and other disasters such as earthquakes as
well as to clinical trials.



# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q99196713)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q99196713)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q99196713&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.4008359)  
