
Tempora: Cell trajectory inference using time-series single-cell RNA sequencing data
====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q99237401]  
  
Publication date : 09 of September, 2020  

# Highlights
ot. We present Tempora, a novel cell trajectory inference method that orders cells using time information from time-series scRNA-seq data.

The ordering problem, commonly termed pseudotime ordering if it is inferred from data without a known temporal ordering, consists of two main parts: the identification of a trajectory representing the paths that cells follow, and the determination of pseudotime values for individual cells along this trajectory. This inferred trajectory enables us to study the sequential changes of gene expression during a process, as well as identify branches and instrumental genes at the branching points

Expanding on the graph partition idea, Monocle 3, the latest version of Monocle, infers the possible paths cells can take through a dynamic process by learning a principal graph on the coarse-grained trajectory constructed by PAGA [14]. Many available trajectory inference methods have been evaluated and integrated in Dyno, a platform that enables users to conveniently apply selected methods to their data [8].

While many scRNA-seq trajectory inference methods exist, few have been designed to consider time-series information.

We first applied Tempora to a small human skeletal muscle myoblast (HSMM) data set, which includes 271 cells collected at 0, 24, 48 and 72 hours after the switch of human myoblast culture from growth to differentiation media.


We manually curated the model trajectories for the in vitro differentiation of human myoblasts and murine cortical development through literature search [23,26,27,28,38,39,40]. The gold standard trajectory for the murine cerebellum data set is taken from the original publication [34]. All gold standards are established at cell population (cluster) level. We represented the lineage relationships between different cell types in a system as a directed acyclic graph. Each node in a model trajectory represents a distinct cell type as noted in the literature and described in the Cell Ontology [54], while the edges represent lineage connections (develops_from relationship in the Cell Ontology) between these cell types.


# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q99237401)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q99237401)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-
disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q99237401&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/JOURNAL.PCBI.1008205)  
