
Cell type-specific genetic regulation of gene expression across human tissues
=============================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q99349840]  
  
Publication date : 01 of September, 2020  

# Highlights

Understanding how human genetic variation affects phenotype requires tissue- or even cell type–specific measurements. Kim-Hellmuth et al. used computational methods to identify cell-type proportions within bulk tissues in the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project dataset to identify cell-type interaction quantitative trait loci and map these to genetic variants correlated with expression or splicing differences between individuals

Identifying the cell type (or types) in which a QTL is active will be key to uncovering the molecular
mechanisms that underlie complex trait variation. Recent studies demonstrated the feasibility of identifying cell type–specific QTLs from bulk tissue RNA-sequencing data by using computational estimates of cell type proportions. To
date, such approaches have only been applied to a limited number of cell types and tissues. By
applying this methodology to GTEx tissues for a diverse set of cell types, we aim to characterize the cellular specificity of genetic effects across human tissues and to describe the contribution of these effects to complex traits.

A growing number of in silico cell
type deconvolution methods and associated
reference panels with cell type–specific marker
genes enable the robust estimation of the
enrichment of specific cell types from bulk
tissue gene expression data. We benchmarked
and used enrichment estimates for seven
cell types (adipocytes, epithelial cells, hepatocytes, keratinocytes, myocytes, neurons,
and neutrophils) across 35 tissues from the
GTEx project to map QTLs that are specific
to at least one cell type. We mapped such
cell type–interaction QTLs for expression and
splicing (ieQTLs and isQTLs, respectively) by
testing for interactions between genotype and
cell type enrichment

--> 1.4.4

We anticipate that the approaches
presented here will complement studies mapping QTLs in single cells.▪

We performed extensive benchmarking for multiple cell types
across several expression datasets (figs. S1
and S2). The xCell method (24), which estimates the enrichment of 64 cell types using
reference profiles, was most suitable on the
combined basis of correlation with cell counts
in blood (fig. S1A), in silico simulations (fig.
S1B), correlation with expression of marker
genes for each cell type (fig. S1, C and D), and
diversity of reference cell types. 

These cell type iQTLs pinpoint the cellular specificity of QTLs that might not necessarily be specific to the tested cell type but
may also capture eQTL effects of correlated (or
anticorrelated) cell types

We annotated the
top cis-eQTLs per gene across tissues with their
cell type ieQTL status for the five cell types with
at least 20 ieQTLs (adipocytes, epithelial cells,
keratinocytes, myocytes, and neutrophils


exhaustive characterization of cell type–specific
QTLs is a highly promising approach toward
a mechanistic understanding of these loci,
complementing experimental assays of variant
functio

However, because those data
are still difficult to obtain for many tissues, our
demonstration of the insights gained from cell
type iQTLs indicates that improving deconvolution approaches and increasing sample
sizes will be valuable in this effort and enable
discoveries for cell types and tissues not considered in this study


# Comments
1.4.4

"Deconvolutional" definition of cell type.


## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q99349840)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q99349840)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q99349840/P921%3BP4510)  
