
Single-cell transcriptomic atlas of the human endometrium during the menstrual cycle
====================================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q99418867]  
  
Publication date : 14 of September, 2020  

# Highlights

We profiled the behavior of seven endometrial cell types, including a previously uncharacterized ciliated cell type, during four major phases of endometrial transformation, and found characteristic signatures for each cell type and phase. We discovered that the human window of implantation opens with an abrupt and discontinuous transcriptomic activation in the epithelia, accompanied with a widespread decidualization feature in the stromal fibroblasts.

Given its relevance to human fertility and regenerative biology, a systematic characterization of endometrial transformation across the menstrual cycle has long been pursued.

 provide a systematic single-cell transcriptomic delineation of endometrial transformation at the levels of cell type, state, proliferation and differentiation across the human menstrual cycle.

ix cell types were thus identified; canonical markers and highly differentially expressed genes enabled straightforward identification of four of these: stromal fibroblast, endothelium, macrophage and lymphocyte (Fig. 1b).

The results validated these ciliated cells as an epithelial cell type embedded in both luminal and glandular epithelia in healthy human endometrium across the menstrual cycle, and also demonstrated the consistent discriminatory power of the new markers we identified (Fig. 2e and Supplementary Dataset 1) across the cycle.

Pseudotime assignment of unciliated epithelia (epi) and stromal fibroblasts (str) across the trajectory of a menstrual cycle

Decidualization is the transformation of stromal fibroblasts where they change from elongated, fibroblast-like cells into enlarged round cells (Fig. 4c) with specific cytoskeleton modifications, playing essential roles in embryo invasion and pregnancy development22.

we looked into the 10x dataset where six of the ten biopsies were between days 19 and 23 (Extended Data Fig. 1b) of the menstrual cycle, when WOI opening is likely to occur. Using the two anchor biopsies (see Methods) as points of reference, seven of the ten biopsies were ordered between early- and mid-secretory phase (Extended Data Fig. 5c). 

Two single-cell studies27,28 on early-pregnant human endometrium reported three subtypes of stromal fibroblasts, including one distinct subtype that co-upregulates IGFBP1 and PRL. We did not, however, observe notable subtype segregation in stromal fibroblasts (Fig. 3) and observed limited numbers of cells co-expressing IGFBP1 and PRL in mid- to late secretory phase (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f), suggesting a less heterogeneous cellular hierarchy than that in early-pregnant endometrial stromal fibroblasts.

Transcriptome signatures in deviating glandular and luminal epithelium
 Subpopulations of unciliated epithelia. The color-coded classification is based on dimension reduction independently performed for each phase or subphase shown in Supplementary Fig. 3a (gray: cells that are transcriptomically between the two subpopulations).
# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q99418867)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q99418867)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q99418867&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/S41591-020-1040-Z)  
