
Human Cell Atlas and cell-type authentication for regenerative medicine
=======================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q99418657]  

# Highlights


The objective of this review is to survey the current progress in the field of cell-type identification, starting with the Human Cell Atlas project, which aims to sequence every cell in the human body, to molecular marker databases for individual cell types and other sources that address cell-type identification for regenerative medicine based on cell data guidelines.

The challenge for the HCA project is to create a universal classification system for all of these projects. Adding to this challenge are regional HCAs, such as HCA Asia, that focus on regional diseases.

To expedite methods for cell-type identification, the HCA project has multiple committees and working groups that coordinate the efforts of independent research groups and unify the results of scRNA-seq. 
Typically, the research groups perform all the data preparation, acquisition, and analysis, and the HCA committees provide the general framework, guidelines, and data repository space

Several cell marker databases are available:

- Labome provides a list of 226 markers for epithelial, dendritic, glial, bone marrow, natural killer, and other cell types.
- CellFinder was the first database website of molecular markers and now features information on 3394 cell types, 50,951 cell lines, and 553,905 protein expres- sions
- CellMarker44, which cur- rently features 13,605 cell markers for 467 cell types in 158 human tissue and 9148 cell markers for 389 cell types in 81 mouse tissues
- At approximately the same time, PanglaoDB was published45, providing data on 8230 markers collected from human and mouse scRNA-seq experiments.

In some cases, heterogeneity, such as that during states of immaturity or senescence, blurs discrete states, leaving a continuous spectrum that greatly complicates cell-type classification (Fig. 1). In such cases, cell types may seem to have hundreds of variants

To help consolidate the many opinions about cell-type classification and provide data-related guidelines for cell- type authentication for clinical application, the International Cell Type Authentication Committee (ICTAC) was created (https://cell-type.org/). The ICTAC was launched to establish criteria and processes for defining, determining, and authenticating all human cell types. 

The ICTAC proposed the concept of reference cell types (RCTs), which are defined by an integrative examination of core properties (species, physiological system, source age, and markers) and additional attributes (functions including potency, morphology, developmental origin, omics, and environmental conditions) and are constantly updated by experts of relevant tissues and organs.

 Accordingly, members of the ISCBI have proposed Minimum Information About a Cellular Assay for Regenerative Medicine (MIACARM) guidelines, which are directed first and foremost at stem cell banks, although MIACARM can also be used to structure data formats of cellular assays in general110. MIACARM is based on the Minimum Information About a Cellular Assay (MIACA), the first attempt at creating a reporting format for describing functional research on cell lines111. Unlike MIACA, MIACARM sets guidelines for human cells used in medical applications or single-cell analysis, including omics. The proposed guidelines have the potential to enhance information flow in stem cell research that aims to produce clinical-grade cells for therapies. As an extension of MIACARM, which currently targets source cell characterization (MIACARM-I) and stem cell characterization (MIACARM-II), the ISCBI community is engaged in plans to provide guidelines for characterizing differentiated cells (MIACARM-III) using ICTAC proposals for cell authentication based on the framework developed for RCTs.

 The many existing databases and the massive data already accumulated affirm the need for the scientific community to work together in creating a universal standard.


# Comments

Lists different cell marker databases. 

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q99418657)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q99418657)  
 * [TABernacle](https://tabernacle.toolforge.org/?#/tab/manual/Q99418657/P921%3BP4510)  
