
Cell Types of the Human Retina and Its Organoids at Single-Cell Resolution
==========================================================================
  
  [@wikidata:Q99569186]  
  
Publication date : 01 of September, 2020  

# Highlights
• Light-sensitive, multilayered human retinal organoids with functional synapses
• 285,441 transcriptomes from light-responsive human retinas and retinal organoids
• Organoid cell types converge to adult peripheral retinal cell types

Expression of disease-associated genes was cell-type-specific in adult retina, and cell-type specificity was retained in organoids. We implicate unexpected cell types in diseases such as macular degeneration. This resource identifies cellular targets for studying disease mechanisms in organoids and for targeted repair in human retinas.

The transcriptomes of some adult human retinal cell types have been described (Liang et al., 2019; Lukowski et al., 2019; Menon et al., 2019; Voigt et al., 2019); however, the cells were sampled from donor retinas post mortem after several hours in an ischemic state. Ischemia leads to irreversible damage to the retina within 20 min (Osborne et al., 2004).

Furthermore, we provide a comparative atlas of cell-type transcriptomes of human retinal organoid and healthy adult human retina that allows identification of cellular targets for studying disease mechanisms in organoids and targeted repair in adult human retinas.

By combining microwell array seeding with checkerboard scraping, 3,700 ± 680 (mean ± SD, n = 3 experiments) retinal organoids can be generated from the iPSCs in a single well of a 6-well plate (Figure 1F). We name this method AMASS (agarose microwell array seeding and scraping).


Organoids have distinct and transcriptomically defined cell classes by week 30. To determine how close the transcriptomes of these cell classes are to those of the adult retina, we sequenced RNA of single cells from light-sensitive retinas of human adult multi-organ donors.

PRKCA antibody staining of rod bipolar cells in organoids revealed somatic, dendritic, and axonal signal (Figures 6E and S6).

We created “disease maps” for 10 non-syndromic retinal diseases for the peripheral (Figures 7A and S7) and foveal retina (Figure S7) as well as for developed organoids (Figures 7B and S7): achromatopsia, congenital stationary night blindness, retinitis pigmentosa, Leber congenital amaurosis, macular degeneration, myopia, cone-rod dystrophy, choroideremia, macular dystrophy, glaucoma, and two syndromic retinal diseases, Usher syndrome and Bardet-Biedl syndrome. We investigated four aspects of these disease maps.

Post mortem retinas can be obtained not only from individuals without retinal diseases but also from individuals affected by common retinal diseases such as diabetic retinopathy, age-related macular degeneration, and glaucoma

# Comments

## Tags

# Links
  
 * [Scholia Profile](https://scholia.toolforge.org/work/Q99569186)  
 * [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q99569186)  
 * [Author Disambiguator](https://author-disambiguator.toolforge.org/work_item_oauth.php?id=Q99569186&batch_id=&match=1&author_list_id=&doit=Get+author+links+for+work)  
 * [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2020.08.013)  
